================================================================================
                    Bhartiya Nyaya Samhita / Indian Penal Code
================================================================================

################################################################################
1
The Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023
(ACT NO. 45 OF 2023)
[As on the 6th October, 2025]
2
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS USED
G.S.R. . . . . . for General Statutory Rules.
S.O. . . . . . ,, Statutory Order.
Notifn. . . . . . ,, Notification.
3
THE BHARATIYA NYAYA SANHITA, 2023
________
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
________
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
SECTIONS
1. Short title, commencement and application.
2. Definitions.
3. General explanations.
CHAPTER II
OF PUNISHMENTS
4. Punishments.
5. Commutation of sentence.
6. Fractions of terms of punishment.
7. Sentence may be (in certain cases of imprisonment) wholly or partly rigorous or simple.
8. Amount of fine, liability in default of payment of fine, etc.
9. Limit of punishment of offence made up of several offences.
10. Punishment of person guilty of one of several offences, judgment stating that it is doubtful of
which.
11. Solitary confinement.
12. Limit of solitary confinement.
13. Enhanced punishment for certain offences after previous conviction.
CHAPTER III
GENERAL EXCEPTIONS
14. Act done by a person bound, or by mistake of fact believing himself bound, by law.
15. Act of Judge when acting judicially.
16. Act done pursuant to judgment or order of Court.
17. Act done by a person justified, or by mistake of fact believing himself justified, by law.
18. Accident in doing a lawful act.
19. Act likely to cause harm, but done without criminal intent, and to prevent other harm.
20. Act of a child under seven years of age.
21. Act of a child above seven and under twelve years of age of immature understanding.
22. Act of a person of unsound mind.
23. Act of a person incapable of judgment by reason of intoxication caused against his will.
24. Offence requiring a particular intent or knowledge committed by one who is intoxicated.
4
SECTIONS
25. Act not intended and not known to be likely to cause death or grievous hurt, done by consent.
26. Act not intended to cause death, done by consent in good faith for person's benefit.
27. Act done in good faith for benefit of child or person of unsound mind, by, or by consent of
guardian.
28. Consent known to be given under fear or misconception.
29. Exclusion of acts which are offences independently of harm caused.
30. Act done in good faith for benefit of a person without consent.
31. Communication made in good faith.
32. Act to which a person is compelled by threats.
33. Act causing slight harm.
Of right of private defence
34. Things done in private defence.
35. Right of private defence of body and of property.
36. Right of private defence against act of a person of unsound mind, etc.
37. Acts against which there is no right of private defence.
38. When right of private defence of body extends to causing death.
39. When such right extends to causing any harm other than death.
40. Commencement and continuance of right of private defence of body.
41. When right of private defence of property extends to causing death.
42. When such right extends to causing any harm other than death.
43. Commencement and continuance of right of private defence of property.
44. Right of private defence against deadly assault when there is risk of harm to innocent person.
CHAPTER IV
OF ABETMENT, CRIMINAL CONSPIRACY AND ATTEMPT
of abetment
45. Abetment of a thing.
46. Abettor.
47. Abetment in India of offences outside India.
48. Abetment outside India for offence in India.
49. Punishment of abetment if act abetted is committed in consequence and where no express
provision is made for its punishment.
50. Punishment of abetment if person abetted does act with different intention from that of
abettor.
51. Liability of abettor when one act abetted and different act done.
52. Abettor when liable to cumulative punishment for act abetted and for act done.
53. Liability of abettor for an effect caused by act abetted different from that intended by abettor.
54. Abettor present when offence is committed.
5
SECTIONS
55. Abetment of offence punishable with death or imprisonment for life.
56. Abetment of offence punishable with imprisonment.
57. Abetting commission of offence by public or by more than ten persons.
58. Concealing design to commit offence punishable with death or imprisonment for life.
59. Public servant concealing design to commit offence which it is his duty to prevent.
60. Concealing design to commit offence punishable with imprisonment.
Of criminal conspiracy
61. Criminal conspiracy.
Of attempt
62. Punishment for attempting to commit offences punishable with imprisonment for life or other
imprisonment.
CHAPTER V
OF OFFENCES AGAINST WOMAN AND CHILD
Of sexual offences
63. Rape.
64. Punishment for rape.
65. Punishment for rape in certain cases.
66. Punishment for causing death or resulting in persistent vegetative state of victim.
67. Sexual intercourse by husband upon his wife during separation.
68. Sexual intercourse by a person in authority.
69. Sexual intercourse by employing deceitful means, etc.
70. Gang rape.
71. Punishment for repeat offenders.
72. Disclosure of identity of victim of certain offences, etc.
73. Printing or publishing any matter relating to Court proceedings without permission.
Of criminal force and assault against woman
74. Assault or use of criminal force to woman with intent to outrage her modesty.
75. Sexual harassment.
76. Assault or use of criminal force to woman with intent to disrobe.
77. Voyeurism.
78. Stalking.
79. Word, gesture or act intended to insult modesty of a woman.
Of offences relating to marriage
80. Dowry death.
6
SECTIONS
81. Cohabitation caused by man deceitfully inducing belief of lawful marriage.
82. Marrying again during lifetime of husband or wife.
83. Marriage ceremony fraudulently gone through without lawful marriage.
84. Enticing or taking away or detaining with criminal intent a married woman.
85. Husband or relative of husband of a woman subjecting her to cruelty.
86. Cruelty defined.
87. Kidnapping, abducting or inducing woman to compel her marriage, etc.
Of causing miscarriage, etc.
88. Causing miscarriage.
89. Causing miscarriage without woman's consent.
90. Death caused by act done with intent to cause miscarriage.
91. Act done with intent to prevent child being born alive or to cause to die after birth.
92. Causing death of quick unborn child by act amounting to culpable homicide.
Of offences against child
93. Exposure and abandonment of child under twelve years of age, by parent or person having
care of it.
94. Concealment of birth by secret disposal of dead body.
95. Hiring, employing or engaging a child to commit an offence.
96. Procuration of child.
97. Kidnapping or abducting child under ten years of age with intent to steal from its person.
98. Selling child for purposes of prostitution, etc.
99. Buying child for purposes of prostitution, etc.
CHAPTER VI
OF OFFENCES AFFECTING THE HUMAN BODY
Of offences affecting life
100. Culpable homicide.
101. Murder.
102. Culpable homicide by causing death of person other than person whose death was intended.
103. Punishment for murder.
104. Punishment for murder by life-convict.
105. Punishment for culpable homicide not amounting to murder.
106. Causing death by negligence.
107. Abetment of suicide of child or person of unsound mind.
108. Abetment of suicide.
109. Attempt to murder.
110. Attempt to commit culpable homicide.
7
SECTIONS
111. Organised crime.
112. Petty organised crime.
113. Terrorist act.
Of hurt
114. Hurt.
115. Voluntarily causing hurt.
116. Grievous hurt.
117. Voluntarily causing grievous hurt.
118. Voluntarily causing hurt or grievous hurt by dangerous weapons or means.
119. Voluntarily causing hurt or grievous hurt to extort property, or to constrain to an illegal act.
120. Voluntarily causing hurt or grievous hurt to extort confession, or to compel restoration of
property.
121. Voluntarily causing hurt or grievous hurt to deter public servant from his duty.
122. Voluntarily causing hurt or grievous hurt on provocation.
123. Causing hurt by means of poison, etc., with intent to commit an offence.
124. Voluntarily causing grievous hurt by use of acid, etc.
125. Act endangering life or personal safety of others.
Of wrongful restraint and wrongful confinement
126. Wrongful restraint.
127. Wrongful confinement.
Of criminal force and assault
128. Force.
129. Criminal force.
130. Assault.
131. Punishment for assault or criminal force otherwise than on grave provocation.
132. Assault or criminal force to deter public servant from discharge of his duty.
133. Assault or criminal force with intent to dishonour person, otherwise than on grave
provocation.
134. Assault or criminal force in attempt to commit theft of property carried by a person.
135. Assault or criminal force in attempt to wrongfully confine a person.
136. Assault or criminal force on grave provocation.
Of kidnapping, abduction, slavery and forced labour
137. Kidnapping.
138. Abduction.
139. Kidnapping or maiming a child for purposes of begging.
140. Kidnapping or abducting in order to murder or for ransom, etc.
141. Importation of girl or boy from foreign country.
8
SECTIONS
142. Wrongfully concealing or keeping in confinement, kidnapped or abducted person.
143. Trafficking of person.
144. Exploitation of a trafficked person.
145. Habitual dealing in slaves.
146. Unlawful compulsory labour.
CHAPTER VII
OF OFFENCES AGAINST THE STATE
147. Waging, or attempting to wage war, or abetting waging of war, against Government of
India.
148. Conspiracy to commit offences punishable by section 147.
149. Collecting arms, etc., with intention of waging war against Government of India.
150. Concealing with intent to facilitate design to wage war.
151. Assaulting President, Governor, etc., with intent to compel or restrain exercise of any lawful
power.
152. Act endangering sovereignty, unity and integrity of India.
153. Waging war against Government of any foreign State at peace with Government of India.
154. Committing depredation on territories of foreign State at peace with Government of India.
155. Receiving property taken by war or depredation mentioned in sections 153 and 154.
156. Public servant voluntarily allowing prisoner of State or war to escape.
157. Public servant negligently suffering such prisoner to escape.
158. Aiding escape of, rescuing or harbouring such prisoner.
CHAPTER VIII
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO THE ARMY, NAVY AND AIR FORCE
159. Abetting mutiny, or attempting to seduce a soldier, sailor or airman from his duty.
160. Abetment of mutiny, if mutiny is committed in consequence thereof.
161. Abetment of assault by soldier, sailor or airman on his superior officer, when in execution of
his office.
162. Abetment of such assault, if assault committed.
163. Abetment of desertion of soldier, sailor or airman.
164. Harbouring deserter.
165. Deserter concealed on board merchant vessel through negligence of master.
166. Abetment of act of insubordination by soldier, sailor or airman.
167. Persons subject to certain Acts.
168. Wearing garb or carrying token used by soldier, sailor or airman.
CHAPTER IX
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO ELECTIONS
169. Candidate, electoral right defined.
9
SECTIONS
170. Bribery.
171. Undue influence at elections.
172. Personation at elections.
173. Punishment for bribery.
174. Punishment for undue influence or personation at an election.
175. False statement in connection with an election.
176. Illegal payments in connection with an election.
177. Failure to keep election accounts.
CHAPTER X
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO COIN, CURRENCY-NOTES, BANK-NOTES, AND GOVERNMENT STAMPS
178. Counterfeiting coin, Government stamps, currency-notes or bank-notes.
179. Using as genuine, forged or counterfeit coin, Government stamp, currency-notes or
bank-notes.
180. Possession of forged or counterfeit coin, Government stamp, currency-notes or bank-notes.
181. Making or possessing instruments or materials for forging or counterfeiting coin,
Government stamp, currency-notes or bank-notes.
182. Making or using documents resembling currency-notes or bank-notes.
183. Effacing writing from substance bearing Government stamp, or removing from document a
stamp used for it, with intent to cause loss to Government.
184. Using Government stamp known to have been before used.
185. Erasure of mark denoting that stamp has been used.
186. Prohibition of fictitious stamps.
187. Person employed in mint causing coin to be of different weight or composition from that
fixed by law.
188. Unlawfully taking coining instrument from mint.
CHAPTER XI
OF OFFENCES AGAINST THE PUBLIC TRANQUILLITY
189. Unlawful assembly.
190. Every member of unlawful assembly guilty of offence committed in prosecution of common
object.
191. Rioting.
192. Wantonly giving provocation with intent to cause riot-if rioting be committed; if not
committed.
193. Liability of owner, occupier, etc., of land on which an unlawful assembly or riot takes place.
194. Affray.
195. Assaulting or obstructing public servant when suppressing riot, etc.
196. Promoting enmity between different groups on grounds of religion, race, place of birth,
residence, language, etc., and doing acts prejudicial to maintenance of harmony.
10
SECTIONS
197. Imputations, assertions prejudicial to national integration.
CHAPTER XII
OF OFFENCES BY OR RELATING TO PUBLIC SERVANTS
198. Public servant disobeying law, with intent to cause injury to any person.
199. Public servant disobeying direction under law.
200. Punishment for non-treatment of victim.
201. Public servant framing an incorrect document with intent to cause injury.
202. Public servant unlawfully engaging in trade.
203. Public servant unlawfully buying or bidding for property.
204. Personating a public servant.
205. Wearing garb or carrying token used by public servant with fraudulent intent.
CHAPTER XIII
OF CONTEMPTS OF THE LAWFUL AUTHORITY OF PUBLIC SERVANTS
206. Absconding to avoid service of summons or other proceeding.
207. Preventing service of summons or other proceeding, or preventing publication thereof.
208. Non-attendance in obedience to an order from public servant.
209. Non-appearance in response to a proclamation under section 84 of Bharatiya Nagarik
Suraksha Sanhita, 2023.
210. Omission to produce document or electronic record to public servant by person legally
bound to produce it.
211. Omission to give notice or information to public servant by person legally bound to give it.
212. Furnishing false information.
213. Refusing oath or affirmation when duly required by public servant to make it.
214. Refusing to answer public servant authorised to question.
215. Refusing to sign statement.
216. False statement on oath or affirmation to public servant or person authorised to administer
an oath or affirmation.
217. False information, with intent to cause public servant to use his lawful power to injury of
another person.
218. Resistance to taking of property by lawful authority of a public servant.
219. Obstructing sale of property offered for sale by authority of public servant.
220. Illegal purchase or bid for property offered for sale by authority of public servant.
221. Obstructing public servant in discharge of public functions.
222. Omission to assist public servant when bound by law to give assistance.
223. Disobedience to order duly promulgated by public servant.
224. Threat of injury to public servant.
225. Threat of injury to induce person to refrain from applying for protection to public servant.
11
SECTIONS
226. Attempt to commit suicide to compel or restrain exercise of lawful power.
CHAPTER XIV
OF FALSE EVIDENCE AND OFFENCES AGAINST PUBLIC JUSTICE
227. Giving false evidence.
228. Fabricating false evidence.
229. Punishment for false evidence.
230. Giving or fabricating false evidence with intent to procure conviction of capital offence.
231. Giving or fabricating false evidence with intent to procure conviction of offence punishable
with imprisonment for life or imprisonment.
232. Threatening any person to give false evidence.
233. Using evidence known to be false.
234. Issuing or signing false certificate.
235. Using as true a certificate known to be false.
236. False statement made in declaration which is by law receivable as evidence.
237. Using as true such declaration knowing it to be false.
238. Causing disappearance of evidence of offence, or giving false information to screen
offender.
239. Intentional omission to give information of offence by person bound to inform.
240. Giving false information respecting an offence committed.
241. Destruction of document or electronic record to prevent its production as evidence.
242. False personation for purpose of act or proceeding in suit or prosecution.
243. Fraudulent removal or concealment of property to prevent its seizure as forfeited or in
execution.
244. Fraudulent claim to property to prevent its seizure as forfeited or in execution.
245. Fraudulently suffering decree for sum not due.
246. Dishonestly making false claim in Court.
247. Fraudulently obtaining decree for sum not due.
248. False charge of offence made with intent to injure.
249. Harbouring offender.
250. Taking gift, etc., to screen an offender from punishment.
251. Offering gift or restoration of property in consideration of screening offender.
252. Taking gift to help to recover stolen property, etc.
253. Harbouring offender who has escaped from custody or whose apprehension has been
ordered.
254. Penalty for harbouring robbers or dacoits.
255. Public servant disobeying direction of law with intent to save person from punishment or
property from forfeiture.
12
SECTIONS
256. Public servant framing incorrect record or writing with intent to save person from
punishment or property from forfeiture.
257. Public servant in judicial proceeding corruptly making report, etc., contrary to law.
258. Commitment for trial or confinement by person having authority who knows that he is
acting contrary to law.
259. Intentional omission to apprehend on part of public servant bound to apprehend.
260. Intentional omission to apprehend on part of public servant bound to apprehend person
under sentence or lawfully committed.
261. Escape from confinement or custody negligently suffered by public servant.
262. Resistance or obstruction by a person to his lawful apprehension.
263. Resistance or obstruction to lawful apprehension of another person.
264. Omission to apprehend, or sufferance of escape, on part of public servant, in cases not
otherwise provided for.
265. Resistance or obstruction to lawful apprehension or escape or rescue in cases not otherwise
provided for.
266. Violation of condition of remission of punishment.
267. Intentional insult or interruption to public servant sitting in judicial proceeding.
268. Personation of assessor.
269. Failure by person released on bail bond or bond to appear in Court.
CHAPTER XV
OF OFFENCES AFFECTING THE PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY, CONVENIENCE,
DECENCY AND MORALS
270. Public nuisance.
271. Negligent act likely to spread infection of disease dangerous to life.
272. Malignant act likely to spread infection of disease dangerous to life.
273. Disobedience to quarantine rule.
274. Adulteration of food or drink intended for sale.
275. Sale of noxious food or drink.
276. Adulteration of drugs.
277. Sale of adulterated drugs.
278. Sale of drug as a different drug or preparation.
279. Fouling water of public spring or reservoir.
280. Making atmosphere noxious to health.
281. Rash driving or riding on a public way.
282. Rash navigation of vessel.
283. Exhibition of false light, mark or buoy.
284. Conveying person by water for hire in unsafe or overloaded vessel.
285. Danger or obstruction in public way or line of navigation.
13
SECTIONS
286. Negligent conduct with respect to poisonous substance.
287. Negligent conduct with respect to fire or combustible matter.
288. Negligent conduct with respect to explosive substance.
289. Negligent conduct with respect to machinery.
290. Negligent conduct with respect to pulling down, repairing or constructing buildings, etc.
291. Negligent conduct with respect to animal.
292. Punishment for public nuisance in cases not otherwise provided for.
293. Continuance of nuisance after injunction to discontinue.
294. Sale, etc., of obscene books, etc.
295. Sale, etc., of obscene objects to child.
296. Obscene acts and songs.
297. Keeping lottery office.
CHAPTER XVI
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO RELIGION
298. Injuring or defiling place of worship with intent to insult religion of any class.
299. Deliberate and malicious acts, intended to outrage religious feelings of any class by
insulting its religion or religious beliefs.
300. Disturbing religious assembly.
301. Trespassing on burial places, etc.
302. Uttering words, etc., with deliberate intent to wound religious feelings of any person.
CHAPTER XVII
OF OFFENCES AGAINST PROPERTY
Of theft
303. Theft.
304. Snatching.
305. Theft in a dwelling house, or means of transportation or place of worship, etc.
306. Theft by clerk or servant of property in possession of master.
307. Theft after preparation made for causing death, hurt or restraint in order to committing of
theft.
Of extortion
308. Extortion.
Of robbery and dacoity
309. Robbery.
310. Dacoity.
311. Robbery, or dacoity, with attempt to cause death or grievous hurt.
312. Attempt to commit robbery or dacoity when armed with deadly weapon.
313. Punishment for belonging to gang of robbers, etc.
14
Of criminal misappropriation of property
SECTIONS
314. Dishonest misappropriation of property.
315. Dishonest misappropriation of property possessed by deceased person at the time of his
death.
Of criminal breach of trust
316. Criminal breach of trust.
Of receiving stolen property
317. Stolen property.
Of cheating
318. Cheating.
319. Cheating by personation.
Of fraudulent deeds and dispositions of property
320. Dishonest or fraudulent removal or concealment of property to prevent distribution among
creditors.
321. Dishonestly or fraudulently preventing debt being available for creditors.
322. Dishonest or fraudulent execution of deed of transfer containing false statement of
consideration.
323. Dishonest or fraudulent removal or concealment of property.
Of mischief
324. Mischief.
325. Mischief by killing or maiming animal.
326. Mischief by injury, inundation, fire or explosive substance, etc.
327. Mischief with intent to destroy or make unsafe a rail, aircraft, decked vessel or one of
twenty tons burden.
328. Punishment for intentionally running vessel aground or ashore with intent to commit theft,
etc.
Of criminal trespass
329. Criminal trespass and house-trespass.
330. House-trespass and hous-ebreaking.
331. Punishment for house-trespass or house-breaking.
332. House-trespass in order to commit offence.
333. House-trespass after preparation for hurt, assault or wrongful restraint.
334. Dishonestly breaking open receptacle containing property.
CHAPTER XVIII
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO DOCUMENTS AND TO PROPERTY MARKS
335. Making a false document.
15
SECTIONS
336. Forgery.
337. Forgery of record of Court or of public register, etc.
338. Forgery of valuable security, will, etc.
339. Having possession of document described in section 337 or section 338, knowing it to be
forged and intending to use it as genuine.
340. Forged document or electronic record and using it as genuine.
341. Making or possessing counterfeit seal, etc., with intent to commit forgery punishable under
section 338.
342. Counterfeiting device or mark used for authenticating documents described in section 338,
or possessing counterfeit marked material.
343. Fraudulent cancellation, destruction, etc., of will, authority to adopt, or valuable security.
344. Falsification of accounts.
Of property marks
345. Property mark.
346. Tampering with property mark with intent to cause injury.
347. Counterfeiting a property mark.
348. Making or possession of any instrument for counterfeiting a property mark.
349. Selling goods marked with a counterfeit property mark.
350. Making a false mark upon any receptacle containing goods.
CHAPTER XIX
OF CRIMINAL INTIMIDATION, INSULT, ANNOYANCE, DEFAMATION, ETC.
351. Criminal intimidation.
352. Intentional insult with intent to provoke breach of peace.
353. Statements conducing to public mischief.
354. Act caused by inducing person to believe that he will be rendered an object of Divine
displeasure.
355. Misconduct in public by a drunken person.
Of defamation
356. Defamation.
Of breach of contract to attend on and supply wants of helpless person
357. Breach of contract to attend on and supply wants of helpless person.
CHAPTER XX
REPEAL AND SAVINGS
358. Repeal and savings.
16
THE BHARATIYA NYAYA SANHITA, 2023
ACT NO. 45 OF 2023
[25th December, 2023.]
An Act to consolidate and amend the provisions relating to offences and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:––
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, commencement and application.––(1) This Act may be called the Bharatiya Nyaya
Sanhita, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force on such date1
as the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Sanhita.
(3) Every person shall be liable to punishment under this Sanhita and not otherwise for every act or
omission contrary to the provisions thereof, of which he shall be guilty within India.
(4) Any person liable, by any law for the time being in force in India, to be tried for an offence
committed beyond India shall be dealt with according to the provisions of this Sanhita for any act
committed beyond India in the same manner as if such act had been committed within India.
(5) The provisions of this Sanhita shall also apply to any offence committed by—
(a) any citizen of India in any place without and beyond India;
(b) any person on any ship or aircraft registered in India wherever it may be;
(c) any person in any place without and beyond India committing offence targeting a computer
resource located in India.
Explanation.—In this section, the word “offence” includes every act committed outside India which,
if committed in India, would be punishable under this Sanhita.
Illustration.
A, who is a citizen of India, commits a murder in any place without and beyond India.
He can be tried and convicted of murder in any place in India in which he may be found.
(6) Nothing in this Sanhita shall affect the provisions of any Act for punishing mutiny and desertion
of officers, soldiers, sailors or airmen in the service of the Government of India or the provisions of any
special or local law.
2. Definitions. –– In this Sanhita, unless the context otherwise requires,––
(1) “act” denotes as well a series of acts as a single act;
(2) “animal” means any living creature, other than a human being;
(3) “child” means any person below the age of eighteen years;
(4) “counterfeit”.––A person is said to “counterfeit” who causes one thing to resemble another
thing, intending by means of that resemblance to practise deception, or knowing it to be likely that
deception will thereby be practised.
Explanation 1.—It is not essential to counterfeiting that the imitation should be exact.
1. 1st day of July, 2024, except the provision of sub-section (2) of section 106, vide notification No. S.O. 850(E), dated, 23rd

February, 2024, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3(ii).
17
Explanation 2.—When a person causes one thing to resemble another thing, and the resemblance
is such that a person might be deceived thereby, it shall be presumed, until the contrary is proved,
that the person so causing the one thing to resemble the other thing intended by means of that
resemblance to practise deception or knew it to be likely that deception would thereby be practised;
(5) “Court” means a Judge who is empowered by law to act judicially alone, or a body of Judges
which is empowered by law to act judicially as a body, when such Judge or body of Judges is acting
judicially;
(6) “death” means the death of a human being unless the contrary appears from the context;
(7) “dishonestly” means doing anything with the intention of causing wrongful gain to one
person or wrongful loss to another person;
(8) “document” means any matter expressed or described upon any substance by means of letters,
figures or marks, or by more than one of those means, and includes electronic and digital record,
intended to be used, or which may be used, as evidence of that matter.
Explanation 1.—It is immaterial by what means or upon what substance the letters, figures or
marks are formed, or whether the evidence is intended for, or may be used in a Court or not.
(a) A writing expressing the terms of a contract, which may be used as evidence of the contract,
is a document.
(b) A cheque upon a banker is a document.
(c) A power-of-attorney is a document.
(d) A map or plan which is intended to be used or which may be used as evidence, is a document.
(e) A writing containing directions or instructions is a document.
Explanation 2.—Whatever is expressed by means of letters, figures or marks as explained by
mercantile or other usage, shall be deemed to be expressed by such letters, figures or marks within
the meaning of this section, although the same may not be actually expressed.
Illustration.
A writes his name on the back of a bill of exchange payable to his order. The meaning of the
endorsement, as explained by mercantile usage, is that the bill is to be paid to the holder. The
endorsement is a document, and shall be construed in the same manner as if the words “pay to the
holder” or words to that effect had been written over the signature;
(9) “fraudulently” means doing anything with the intention to defraud but not otherwise;
(10) “gender”.—The pronoun “he” and its derivatives are used of any person, whether male,
female or transgender.
Explanation.–– “transgender” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause (k) of section 2 of
the Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Act, 2019 (40 of 2019);
(11) “good faith”.—Nothing is said to be done or believed in “good faith” which is done or
believed without due care and attention;
(12) “Government” means the Central Government or a State Government;
(13) “harbour” includes supplying a person with shelter, food, drink, money, clothes, arms,
ammunition or means of conveyance, or the assisting a person by any means, whether of the same
kind as those enumerated in this clause or not, to evade apprehension;
(14) “injury” means any harm whatever illegally caused to any person, in body, mind, reputation
or property;
(15) “illegal” and “legally bound to do”.—The word “illegal” is applicable to everything which is
an offence or which is prohibited by law, or which furnishes ground for a civil action; and a person is
said to be “legally bound to do” whatever it is illegal in him to omit;
18
(16) “Judge” means a person who is officially designated as a Judge and includes a person,––
(i) who is empowered by law to give, in any legal proceeding, civil or criminal, a
definitive judgment, or a judgment which, if not appealed against, would be definitive, or a
judgment which, if confirmed by some other authority, would be definitive; or
(ii) who is one of a body or persons, which body of persons is empowered by law to give
such a judgment.
Illustration.
A Magistrate exercising jurisdiction in respect of a charge on which he has power to sentence to
fine or imprisonment, with or without appeal, is a Judge;
(17) “life” means the life of a human being, unless the contrary appears from the context;
(18) “local law” means a law applicable only to a particular part of India;
(19) “man” means male human being of any age;
(20) “month” and “year”.––Wherever the word “month” or the word “year” is used, it is to be
understood that the month or the year is to be reckoned according to the Gregorian calendar;
(21) “movable property” includes property of every description, except land and things attached
to the earth or permanently fastened to anything which is attached to the earth;
(22) “number”.—Unless the contrary appears from the context, words importing the singular
number include the plural number, and words importing the plural number include the singular
number;
(23) “oath” includes a solemn affirmation substituted by law for an oath, and any declaration
required or authorised by law to be made before a public servant or to be used for the purpose of
proof, whether in a Court or not;
(24) “offence”.—Except in the Chapters and sections mentioned in sub-clauses (a) and (b), the
word “offence” means a thing made punishable by this Sanhita, but––
(a) in Chapter III and in the following sections, namely, sub-sections (2), (3), (4) and (5) of
section 8, sections 9, 49, 50, 52, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 119, 120, 123, sub-sections (7) and
(8) of section 127, 222, 230, 231, 240, 248, 250, 251, 259, 260, 261, 262, 263, sub-sections (6)
and (7) of section 308 and sub-section (2) of section 330, the word “offence” means a thing
punishable under this Sanhita, or under any special law or local law; and
(b) in sub-section (1) of section 189, sections 211, 212, 238, 239, 249, 253 and
sub-section (1) of section 329, the word “offence” shall have the same meaning when the act
punishable under the special law or local law is punishable under such law with imprisonment for
a term of six months or more, whether with or without fine;
(25) “omission” denotes as well as a series of omissions as a single omission;
(26) “person” includes any company or association or body of persons, whether incorporated or
not;
(27) “public” includes any class of the public or any community;
(28) “public servant” means a person falling under any of the descriptions, namely:—
(a) every commissioned officer in the Army, Navy or Air Force;
(b) every Judge including any person empowered by law to discharge, whether by
himself or as a member of any body of persons, any adjudicatory functions;
(c) every officer of a Court including a liquidator, receiver or commissioner whose duty
it is, as such officer, to investigate or report on any matter of law or fact, or to make,
authenticate, or keep any document, or to take charge or dispose of any property, or to
19
execute any judicial process, or to administer any oath, or to interpret, or to preserve order in
the Court, and every person specially authorised by a Court to perform any of such duties;
(d) every assessor or member of a panchayat assisting a Court or public servant;
(e) every arbitrator or other person to whom any cause or matter has been referred for
decision or report by any Court, or by any other competent public authority;
(f) every person who holds any office by virtue of which he is empowered to place or
keep any person in confinement;
(g) every officer of the Government whose duty it is, as such officer, to prevent offences,
to give information of offences, to bring offenders to justice, or to protect the public health,
safety or convenience;
(h) every officer whose duty it is, as such officer, to take, receive, keep or expend any
property on behalf of the Government, or to make any survey, assessment or contract on
behalf of the Government, or to execute any revenue-process, or to investigate, or to report,
on any matter affecting the pecuniary interests of the Government, or to make, authenticate
or keep any document relating to the pecuniary interests of the Government, or to prevent the
infraction of any law for the protection of the pecuniary interests of the Government;
(i) every officer whose duty it is, as such officer, to take, receive, keep or expend any
property, to make any survey or assessment or to levy any rate or tax for any secular common
purpose of any village, town or district, or to make, authenticate or keep any document for
the ascertaining of the rights of the people of any village, town or district;
(j) every person who holds any office by virtue of which he is empowered to prepare,
publish, maintain or revise an electoral roll or to conduct an election or part of an election;
(k) every person—
(i) in the service or pay of the Government or remunerated by fees or commission for
the performance of any public duty by the Government;
(ii) in the service or pay of a local authority as defined in clause (31) of section 3 of
the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), a corporation established by or under a
Central or State Act or a Government company as defined in clause (45) of section 2 of
the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013).
Explanation.—
(a) persons falling under any of the descriptions made in this clause are public servants,
whether appointed by the Government or not;
(b) every person who is in actual possession of the situation of a public servant, whatever
legal defect there may be in his right to hold that situation is a public servant;
(c) “election” means an election for the purpose of selecting members of any legislative,
municipal or other public authority, of whatever character, the method of selection to which
is by, or under any law for the time being in force.
Illustration.
A Municipal Commissioner is a public servant;
(29) “reason to believe”.—A person is said to have “reason to believe” a thing, if he has
sufficient cause to believe that thing but not otherwise;
(30) “special law” means a law applicable to a particular subject;
(31) “valuable security” means a document which is, or purports to be, a document whereby any
legal right is created, extended, transferred, restricted, extinguished or released, or whereby any
person acknowledges that he lies under legal liability, or has not a certain legal right.
20
Illustration.
A writes his name on the back of a bill of exchange. As the effect of this endorsement is to
transfer the right to the bill to any person who may become the lawful holder of it, the endorsement is
a “valuable security”;
(32) “vessel” means anything made for the conveyance by water of human beings or of property;
(33) “voluntarily”.—A person is said to cause an effect “voluntarily” when he causes it by means
whereby he intended to cause it, or by means which, at the time of employing those means, he knew
or had reason to believe to be likely to cause it.
Illustration.
A sets fire, by night, to an inhabited house in a large town, for the purpose of facilitating a
robbery and thus causes the death of a person. Here, A may not have intended to cause death; and
may even be sorry that death has been caused by his act; yet, if he knew that he was likely to cause
death, he has caused death voluntarily;
(34) “will” means any testamentary document;
(35) “woman” means a female human being of any age;
(36) “wrongful gain” means gain by unlawful means of property to which the person gaining is
not legally entitled;
(37) “wrongful loss” means the loss by unlawful means of property to which the person losing it
is legally entitled;
(38) “gaining wrongfully” and “losing wrongfully”.—A person is said to gain wrongfully when
such person retains wrongfully, as well as when such person acquires wrongfully. A person is said to
lose wrongfully when such person is wrongfully kept out of any property, as well as when such
person is wrongfully deprived of property; and
(39) words and expressions used but not defined in this Sanhita but defined in the Information
Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000) and the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 shall have the
meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act and Sanhita.
3. General explanations.—(1) Throughout this Sanhita every definition of an offence, every penal
provision, and every Illustration of every such definition or penal provision, shall be understood subject
to the exceptions contained in the Chapter entitled “General Exceptions”, though those exceptions are not
repeated in such definition, penal provision, or Illustration.
Illustrations.
(a) The sections in this Sanhita, which contain definitions of offences, do not express that a child
under seven years of age cannot commit such offences; but the definitions are to be understood subject to
the general exception which provides that nothing shall be an offence which is done by a child under
seven years of age.
(b) A, a police officer, without warrant, apprehends Z, who has committed murder. Here A is not
guilty of the offence of wrongful confinement; for he was bound by law to apprehend Z, and therefore the
case falls within the general exception which provides that “nothing is an offence which is done by a
person who is bound by law to do it”.
(2) Every expression which is explained in any Part of this Sanhita, is used in every Part of this
Sanhita in conformity with the explanation.
(3) When property is in the possession of a person’s spouse, clerk or servant, on account of that
person, it is in that person’s possession within the meaning of this Sanhita.
Explanation.—A person employed temporarily or on a particular occasion in the capacity of a clerk
or servant, is a clerk or servant within the meaning of this sub-section.
21
(4) In every Part of this Sanhita, except where a contrary intention appears from the context, words
which refer to acts done extend also to illegal omissions.
(5) When a criminal act is done by several persons in furtherance of the common intention of all,
each of such persons is liable for that act in the same manner as if it were done by him alone.
(6) Whenever an act, which is criminal only by reason of its being done with a criminal knowledge or
intention, is done by several persons, each of such persons who joins in the act with such knowledge or
intention is liable for the act in the same manner as if the act were done by him alone with that knowledge
or intention.
(7) Wherever the causing of a certain effect, or an attempt to cause that effect, by an act or by an
omission, is an offence, it is to be understood that the causing of that effect partly by an act and partly by
an omission is the same offence.
Illustration.
A intentionally causes Z’s death, partly by illegally omitting to give Z food, and partly by beating Z.
A has committed murder.
(8) When an offence is committed by means of several acts, whoever intentionally cooperates in the
commission of that offence by doing any one of those acts, either singly or jointly with any other person,
commits that offence.
Illustrations.
(a) A and B agree to murder Z by severally and at different times giving him small doses of poison.
A and B administer the poison according to the agreement with intent to murder Z. Z dies from the
effects the several doses of poison so administered to him. Here A and B intentionally cooperate in the
commission of murder and as each of them does an act by which the death is caused, they are both guilty
of the offence though their acts are separate.
(b) A and B are joint jailors, and as such have the charge of Z, a prisoner, alternatively for six hours
at a time. A and B, intending to cause Z’s death, knowingly cooperate in causing that effect by illegally
omitting, each during the time of his attendance, to furnish Z with food supplied to them for that purpose.
Z dies of hunger. Both A and B are guilty of the murder of Z.
(c) A, a jailor, has the charge of Z, a prisoner. A, intending to cause Z’s death, illegally omits to
supply Z with food; in consequence of which Z is much reduced in strength, but the starvation is not
sufficient to cause his death. A is dismissed from his office, and B succeeds him. B, without collusion or
cooperation with A, illegally omits to supply Z with food, knowing that he is likely thereby to cause Z’s
death. Z dies of hunger. B is guilty of murder, but, as A did not cooperate with B. A is guilty only of an
attempt to commit murder.
(9) Where several persons are engaged or concerned in the commission of a criminal act, they may be
guilty of different offences by means of that act.
Illustration.
A attacks Z under such circumstances of grave provocation that his killing of Z would be only
culpable homicide not amounting to murder. B, having ill-will towards Z and intending to kill him, and
not having been subject to the provocation, assists A in killing Z. Here, though A and B are both engaged
in causing Z’s death, B is guilty of murder, and A is guilty only of culpable homicide.
CHAPTER II
OF PUNISHMENTS
4. Punishments. —The punishments to which offenders are liable under the provisions of this
Sanhita are—
(a) Death;
(b) Imprisonment for life;
22
(c) Imprisonment, which is of two descriptions, namely:—
(1) Rigorous, that is, with hard labour;
(2) Simple;
(d) Forfeiture of property;
(e) Fine;
(f) Community Service.
5. Commutation of sentence.—The appropriate Government may, without the consent of the
offender, commute any punishment under this Sanhita to any other punishment in accordance
with section 474 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section the expression “appropriate Government” means, —
(a) in cases where the sentence is a sentence of death or is for an offence against any law relating
to a matter to which the executive power of the Union extends, the Central Government; and
(b) in cases where the sentence (whether of death or not) is for an offence against any law
relating to a matter to which the executive power of the State extends, the Government of the State
within which the offender is sentenced.
6. Fractions of terms of punishment.—In calculating fractions of terms of punishment,
imprisonment for life shall be reckoned as equivalent to imprisonment for twenty years unless otherwise
provided.
7. Sentence may be (in certain cases of imprisonment) wholly or partly rigorous or simple.—In
every case in which an offender is punishable with imprisonment which may be of either description, it
shall be competent to the Court which sentences such offender to direct in the sentence that such
imprisonment shall be wholly rigorous, or that such imprisonment shall be wholly simple, or that any part
of such imprisonment shall be rigorous and the rest simple.
8. Amount of fine, liability in default of payment of fine, etc.—(1) Where no sum is expressed to
which a fine may extend, the amount of fine to which the offender is liable is unlimited, but shall not be
excessive.
(2) In every case of an offence—
(a) punishable with imprisonment as well as fine, in which the offender is sentenced to a fine,
whether with or without imprisonment;
(b) punishable with imprisonment or fine, or with fine only, in which the offender is sentenced to
a fine,
it shall be competent to the Court which sentences such offender to direct by the sentence that, in default
of payment of the fine, the offender shall suffer imprisonment for a certain term, in which imprisonment
shall be in excess of any other imprisonment to which he may have been sentenced or to which he may be
liable under a commutation of a sentence.
(3) The term for which the Court directs the offender to be imprisoned in default of payment of a fine
shall not exceed one-fourth of the term of imprisonment which is the maximum fixed for the offence, if
the offence be punishable with imprisonment as well as fine.
(4) The imprisonment which the Court imposes in default of payment of a fine or in default of
community service may be of any description to which the offender might have been sentenced for the
offence.
(5) If the offence is punishable with fine or community service, the imprisonment which the Court
imposes in default of payment of the fine or in default of community service shall be simple, and the term
for which the Court directs the offender to be imprisoned, in default of payment of fine or in default of
community service, shall not exceed,—
(a) two months when the amount of the fine does not exceed five thousand rupees;
23
(b) four months when the amount of the fine does not exceed ten thousand rupees; and
(c) one year in any other case.
(6) (a) The imprisonment which is imposed in default of payment of a fine shall terminate whenever
that fine is either paid or levied by process of law;
(b) If, before the expiration of the term of imprisonment fixed in default of payment, such a
proportion of the fine be paid or levied that the term of imprisonment suffered in default of payment is
not less than proportional to the part of the fine still unpaid, the imprisonment shall terminate.
Illustration.
A is sentenced to a fine of one thousand rupees and to four months’ imprisonment in default of
payment. Here, if seven hundred and fifty rupees of the fine be paid or levied before the expiration of one
month of the imprisonment, A will be discharged as soon as the first month has expired. If seven hundred
and fifty rupees be paid or levied at the time of the expiration of the first month, or at any later time while
A continues in imprisonment, A will be immediately discharged. If five hundred rupees of the fine be
paid or levied before the expiration of two months of the imprisonment, A will be discharged as soon as
the two months are completed. If five hundred rupees be paid or levied at the time of the expiration of
those two months, or at any later time while A continues in imprisonment, A will be immediately
discharged.
(7) The fine, or any part thereof which remains unpaid, may be levied at any time within six years
after the passing of the sentence, and if, under the sentence, the offender be liable to imprisonment for a
longer period than six years, then at any time previous to the expiration of that period; and the death of
the offender does not discharge from the liability any property which would, after his death, be legally
liable for his debts.
9. Limit of punishment of offence made up of several offences.—(1) Where anything which is an
offence is made up of parts, any of which parts is itself an offence, the offender shall not be punished
with the punishment of more than one of such his offences, unless it be so expressly provided.
(2) Where—
(a) anything is an offence falling within two or more separate definitions of any law in force for
the time being by which offences are defined or punished; or
(b) several acts, of which one or more than one would by itself or themselves constitute an
offence, constitute, when combined, a different offence,
the offender shall not be punished with a more severe punishment than the Court which tries him could
award for any one of such offences.
Illustrations.
(a) A gives Z fifty strokes with a stick. Here A may have committed the offence of voluntarily
causing hurt to Z by the whole beating, and also by each of the blows which make up the whole beating.
If A were liable to punishment for every blow, he might be imprisoned for fifty years, one for each blow.
But he is liable only to one punishment for the whole beating.
(b) But, if, while A is beating Z, Y interferes, and A intentionally strikes Y, here, as the blow given to
Y is no part of the act whereby A voluntarily causes hurt to Z, A is liable to one punishment for
voluntarily causing hurt to Z, and to another for the blow given to Y.
10. Punishment of person guilty of one of several offences, judgment stating that it is doubtful
of which.—In all cases in which judgment is given that a person is guilty of one of several offences
specified in the judgment, but that it is doubtful of which of these offences he is guilty, the offender shall
be punished for the offence for which the lowest punishment is provided if the same punishment is not
provided for all.
11. Solitary confinement.—Whenever any person is convicted of an offence for which under this
Sanhita the Court has power to sentence him to rigorous imprisonment, the Court may, by its sentence,
24
order that the offender shall be kept in solitary confinement for any portion or portions of the
imprisonment to which he is sentenced, not exceeding three months in the whole, according to the
following scale, namely: —
(a) a time not exceeding one month if the term of imprisonment shall not exceed six months;
(b) a time not exceeding two months if the term of imprisonment shall exceed six months and
shall not exceed one year;
(c) a time not exceeding three months if the term of imprisonment shall exceed one year.
12. Limit of solitary confinement.—In executing a sentence of solitary confinement, such
confinement shall in no case exceed fourteen days at a time, with intervals between the periods of solitary
confinement of not less duration than such periods; and when the imprisonment awarded shall exceed
three months, the solitary confinement shall not exceed seven days in any one month of the whole
imprisonment awarded, with intervals between the periods of solitary confinement of not less duration
than such periods.
13. Enhanced punishment for certain offences after previous conviction.—Whoever, having been
convicted by a Court in India, of an offence punishable under Chapter X or Chapter XVII of this Sanhita
with imprisonment of either description for a term of three years or upwards, shall be guilty of any
offence punishable under either of those Chapters with like imprisonment for the like term, shall be
subject for every such subsequent offence to imprisonment for life, or to imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to ten years.
CHAPTER III
GENERAL EXCEPTIONS
14. Act done by a person bound, or by mistake of fact believing himself bound, by law.—
Nothing is an offence which is done by a person who is, or who by reason of a mistake of fact and not by
reason of a mistake of law in good faith believes himself to be, bound by law to do it.
Illustrations.
(a) A, a soldier, fires on a mob by the order of his superior officer, in conformity with the
commands of the law. A has committed no offence.
(b) A, an officer of a Court, being ordered by that Court to arrest Y, and, after due enquiry,
believing Z to be Y, arrests Z. A has committed no offence.
15. Act of Judge when acting judicially.—Nothing is an offence which is done by a Judge when
acting judicially in the exercise of any power which is, or which in good faith he believes to be, given to
him by law.
16. Act done pursuant to judgment or order of Court.—Nothing which is done in pursuance of, or
which is warranted by the judgment or order of, a Court; if done whilst such judgment or order remains in
force, is an offence, notwithstanding the Court may have had no jurisdiction to pass such judgment or
order, provided the person doing the act in good faith believes that the Court had such jurisdiction.
17. Act done by a person justified, or by mistake of fact believing himself justified, by law.—
Nothing is an offence which is done by any person who is justified by law, or who by reason of a mistake
of fact and not by reason of a mistake of law in good faith, believes himself to be justified by law, in
doing it.
Illustration.
25
A sees Z commit what appears to A to be a murder. A, in the exercise, to the best of his judgment
exerted in good faith, of the power which the law gives to all persons of apprehending murderers in the
fact, seizes Z, in order to bring Z before the proper authorities. A has committed no offence, though it
may turn out that Z was acting in self-defence.
18. Accident in doing a lawful act.—Nothing is an offence which is done by accident or misfortune,
and without any criminal intention or knowledge in the doing of a lawful act in a lawful manner by lawful
means and with proper care and caution.
Illustration.
A is at work with a hatchet; the head flies off and kills a man who is standing by. Here, if there was
no want of proper caution on the part of A, his act is excusable and not an offence.
19. Act likely to cause harm, but done without criminal intent, and to prevent other harm.—
Nothing is an offence merely by reason of its being done with the knowledge that it is likely to cause
harm, if it be done without any criminal intention to cause harm, and in good faith for the purpose of
preventing or avoiding other harm to person or property.
Explanation.—It is a question of fact in such a case whether the harm to be prevented or avoided was
of such a nature and so imminent as to justify or excuse the risk of doing the act with the knowledge that
it was likely to cause harm.
Illustrations.
(a) A, the captain of a vessel, suddenly and without any fault or negligence on his part, finds himself
in such a position that, before he can stop his vessel, he must inevitably run down a boat B, with twenty
or thirty passengers on board, unless he changes the course of his vessel, and that, by changing his
course, he must incur risk of running down a boat C with only two passengers on board, which he may
possibly clear. Here, if A alters his course without any intention to run down the boat C and in good faith
for the purpose of avoiding the danger to the passengers in the boat B, he is not guilty of an offence,
though he may run down the boat C by doing an act which he knew was likely to cause that effect, if it be
found as a matter of fact that the danger which he intended to avoid was such as to excuse him in
incurring the risk of running down the boat C.
(b) A, in a great fire, pulls down houses in order to prevent the conflagration from spreading. He does
this with the intention in good faith of saving human life or property. Here, if it be found that the harm to
be prevented was of such a nature and so imminent as to excuse A’s act, A is not guilty of the offence.
20. Act of a child under seven years of age.—Nothing is an offence which is done by a child under
seven years of age.
21. Act of a child above seven and under twelve years of age of immature understanding.—
Nothing is an offence which is done by a child above seven years of age and under twelve years of age,
who has not attained sufficient maturity of understanding to judge of the nature and consequences of his
conduct on that occasion.
22. Act of a person of unsound mind.—Nothing is an offence which is done by a person who, at the
time of doing it, by reason of unsoundness of mind, is incapable of knowing the nature of the act, or that
he is doing what is either wrong or contrary to law.
23. Act of a person incapable of judgment by reason of intoxication caused against his will.—
Nothing is an offence which is done by a person who, at the time of doing it, is, by reason of intoxication,
incapable of knowing the nature of the act, or that he is doing what is either wrong, or contrary to law;
provided that the thing which intoxicated him was administered to him without his knowledge or against
his will.
24. Offence requiring a particular intent or knowledge committed by one who is intoxicated.—
In cases where an act done is not an offence unless done with a particular knowledge or intent, a person
who does the act in a state of intoxication shall be liable to be dealt with as if he had the same knowledge
as he would have had if he had not been intoxicated, unless the thing which intoxicated him was
administered to him without his knowledge or against his will.
26
25. Act not intended and not known to be likely to cause death or grievous hurt, done by
consent.—Nothing which is not intended to cause death, or grievous hurt, and which is not known by the
doer to be likely to cause death or grievous hurt, is an offence by reason of any harm which it may cause,
or be intended by the doer to cause, to any person, above eighteen years of age, who has given consent,
whether express or implied, to suffer that harm; or by reason of any harm which it may be known by the
doer to be likely to cause to any such person who has consented to take the risk of that harm.
Illustration.
A and Z agree to fence with each other for amusement. This agreement implies the consent of each to
suffer any harm which, in the course of such fencing, may be caused without foul play; and if A, while
playing fairly, hurts Z, A commits no offence.
26. Act not intended to cause death, done by consent in good faith for person’s benefit.—
Nothing, which is not intended to cause death, is an offence by reason of any harm which it may cause, or
be intended by the doer to cause, or be known by the doer to be likely to cause, to any person for whose
benefit it is done in good faith, and who has given a consent, whether express or implied, to suffer that
harm, or to take the risk of that harm.
Illustration.
A, a surgeon, knowing that a particular operation is likely to cause the death of Z, who suffers under
the painful complaint, but not intending to cause Z’s death, and intending, in good faith, Z’s benefit,
performs that operation on Z, with Z’s consent. A has committed no offence.
27. Act done in good faith for benefit of child or person of unsound mind, by, or by consent of
guardian.—Nothing which is done in good faith for the benefit of a person under twelve years of age, or
person of unsound mind, by, or by consent, either express or implied, of the guardian or other person
having lawful charge of that person, is an offence by reason of any harm which it may cause, or be
intended by the doer to cause or be known by the doer to be likely to cause to that person:
Provided that this exception shall not extend to—
(a) the intentional causing of death, or to the attempting to cause death;
(b) the doing of anything which the person doing it knows to be likely to cause death, for any
purpose other than the preventing of death or grievous hurt, or the curing of any grievous disease or
infirmity;
(c) the voluntary causing of grievous hurt, or to the attempting to cause grievous hurt, unless it be
for the purpose of preventing death or grievous hurt, or the curing of any grievous disease or
infirmity;
(d) the abetment of any offence, to the committing of which offence it would not extend.
Illustration.
A, in good faith, for his child’s benefit without his child’s consent, has his child cut for the stone by a
surgeon knowing it to be likely that the operation will cause the child’s death, but not intending to cause
the child’s death. A is within the exception, in as much as his object was the cure of the child.
28. Consent known to be given under fear or misconception.—A consent is not such a consent as
is intended by any section of this Sanhita,—
(a) if the consent is given by a person under fear of injury, or under a misconception of fact, and
if the person doing the act knows, or has reason to believe, that the consent was given in consequence
of such fear or misconception; or
(b) if the consent is given by a person who, from unsoundness of mind, or intoxication, is unable
to understand the nature and consequence of that to which he gives his consent; or
(c) unless the contrary appears from the context, if the consent is given by a person who is under
twelve years of age.
27
29. Exclusion of acts which are offences independently of harm caused.—The exceptions in
sections 25, 26 and 27 do not extend to acts which are offences independently of any harm which they
may cause, or be intended to cause, or be known to be likely to cause, to the person giving the consent, or
on whose behalf the consent is given.
Illustration.
Causing miscarriage (unless caused in good faith for the purpose of saving the life of the woman) is
an offence independently of any harm which it may cause or be intended to cause to the woman.
Therefore, it is not an offence “by reason of such harm”; and the consent of the woman or of her guardian
to the causing of such miscarriage does not justify the act.
30. Act done in good faith for benefit of a person without consent.—Nothing is an offence by
reason of any harm which it may cause to a person for whose benefit it is done in good faith, even
without that person’s consent, if the circumstances are such that it is impossible for that person to signify
consent, or if that person is incapable of giving consent, and has no guardian or other person in lawful
charge of him from whom it is possible to obtain consent in time for the thing to be done with benefit:
Provided that this exception shall not extend to—
(a) the intentional causing of death, or the attempting to cause death;
(b) the doing of anything which the person doing it knows to be likely to cause death, for any
purpose other than the preventing of death or grievous hurt, or the curing of any grievous disease or
infirmity;
(c) the voluntary causing of hurt, or to the attempting to cause hurt, for any purpose other than
the preventing of death or hurt;
(d) the abetment of any offence, to the committing of which offence it would not extend.
Illustrations.
(1) Z is thrown from his horse, and is insensible. A, a surgeon, finds that Z requires to be trepanned.
A, not intending Z’s death, but in good faith, for Z’s benefit, performs the trepan before Z recovers his
power of judging for himself. A has committed no offence.
(2) Z is carried off by a tiger. A fires at the tiger knowing it to be likely that the shot may kill Z, but
not intending to kill Z, and in good faith intending Z’s benefit. A’s bullet gives Z a mortal wound. A has
committed no offence.
(3) A, a surgeon, sees a child suffer an accident which is likely to prove fatal unless an operation be
immediately performed. There is no time to apply to the child’s guardian. A performs the operation in
spite of the entreaties of the child, intending, in good faith, the child’s benefit. A has committed no
offence.
(4) A is in a house which is on fire, with Z, a child. People below hold out a blanket. A drops the
child from the house top, knowing it to be likely that the fall may kill the child, but not intending to kill
the child, and intending, in good faith, the child’s benefit. Here, even if the child is killed by the fall, A
has committed no offence.
Explanation.—Mere pecuniary benefit is not benefit within the meaning of sections 26, 27 and this
section.
31. Communication made in good faith.—No communication made in good faith is an offence by
reason of any harm to the person to whom it is made, if it is made for the benefit of that person.
Illustration.
28
A, a surgeon, in good faith, communicates to a patient his opinion that he cannot live. The patient
dies in consequence of the shock. A has committed no offence, though he knew it to be likely that the
communication might cause the patient’s death.
32. Act to which a person is compelled by threats.—Except murder, and offences against the State
punishable with death, nothing is an offence which is done by a person who is compelled to do it by
threats, which, at the time of doing it, reasonably cause the apprehension that instant death to that person
will otherwise be the consequence:
Provided that the person doing the act did not of his own accord, or from a reasonable apprehension
of harm to himself short of instant death, place himself in the situation by which he became subject to
such constraint.
Explanation 1.—A person who, of his own accord, or by reason of a threat of being beaten, joins a
gang of dacoits, knowing their character, is not entitled to the benefit of this exception, on the ground of
his having been compelled by his associates to do anything that is an offence by law.
Explanation 2.—A person seized by a gang of dacoits, and forced, by threat of instant death, to do a
thing which is an offence by law; for example, a smith compelled to take his tools and to force the door
of a house for the dacoits to enter and plunder it, is entitled to the benefit of this exception.
33. Act causing slight harm.—Nothing is an offence by reason that it causes, or that it is intended to
cause, or that it is known to be likely to cause, any harm, if that harm is so slight that no person of
ordinary sense and temper would complain of such harm.
Of right of private defence
34. Things done in private defence.—Nothing is an offence which is done in the exercise of the
right of private defence.
35. Right of private defence of body and of property.—Every person has a right, subject to the
restrictions contained in section 37, to defend—
(a) his own body, and the body of any other person, against any offence affecting the human
body;
(b) the property, whether movable or immovable, of himself or of any other person, against any
act which is an offence falling under the definition of theft, robbery, mischief or criminal trespass, or
which is an attempt to commit theft, robbery, mischief or criminal trespass.
36. Right of private defence against act of a person of unsound mind, etc.—When an act, which
would otherwise be a certain offence, is not that offence, by reason of the youth, the want of maturity of
understanding, the unsoundness of mind or the intoxication of the person doing that act, or by reason of
any misconception on the part of that person, every person has the same right of private defence against
that act which he would have if the act were that offence.
Illustrations.
(a) Z, a person of unsound mind, attempts to kill A; Z is guilty of no offence. But A has the same
right of private defence which he would have if Z were sane.
(b) A enters by night a house which he is legally entitled to enter. Z, in good faith, taking A for a
house-breaker, attacks A. Here Z, by attacking A under this misconception, commits no offence. But A
has the same right of private defence against Z, which he would have if Z were not acting under that
misconception.
37. Acts against which there is no right of private defence.—(1) There is no right of private
defence, —
(a) against an act which does not reasonably cause the apprehension of death or of grievous hurt,
if done, or attempted to be done, by a public servant acting in good faith under colour of his office,
though that act, may not be strictly justifiable by law;
29
(b) against an act which does not reasonably cause the apprehension of death or of grievous hurt,
if done, or attempted to be done, by the direction of a public servant acting in good faith under colour
of his office, though that direction may not be strictly justifiable by law;
(c) in cases in which there is time to have recourse to the protection of the public authorities.
(2) The right of private defence in no case extends to the inflicting of more harm than it is necessary
to inflict for the purpose of defence.
Explanation 1.—A person is not deprived of the right of private defence against an act done, or
attempted to be done, by a public servant, as such, unless he knows or has reason to believe, that the
person doing the act is such public servant.
Explanation 2.—A person is not deprived of the right of private defence against an act done, or
attempted to be done, by the direction of a public servant, unless he knows, or has reason to believe, that
the person doing the act is acting by such direction, or unless such person states the authority under which
he acts, or if he has authority in writing, unless he produces such authority, if demanded.
38. When right of private defence of body extends to causing death.—The right of private
defence of the body extends, under the restrictions specified in section 37, to the voluntary causing of
death or of any other harm to the assailant, if the offence which occasions the exercise of the right be of
any of the descriptions hereinafter enumerated, namely:—
(a) such an assault as may reasonably cause the apprehension that death will otherwise be the
consequence of such assault;
(b) such an assault as may reasonably cause the apprehension that grievous hurt will otherwise be
the consequence of such assault;
(c) an assault with the intention of committing rape;
(d) an assault with the intention of gratifying unnatural lust;
(e) an assault with the intention of kidnapping or abducting;
(f) an assault with the intention of wrongfully confining a person, under circumstances which
may reasonably cause him to apprehend that he will be unable to have recourse to the public
authorities for his release;
(g) an act of throwing or administering acid or an attempt to throw or administer acid which may
reasonably cause the apprehension that grievous hurt will otherwise be the consequence of such act.
39. When such right extends to causing any harm other than death.—If the offence be not of any
of the descriptions specified in section 38, the right of private defence of the body does not extend to the
voluntary causing of death to the assailant, but does extend, under the restrictions specified in section 37,
to the voluntary causing to the assailant of any harm other than death.
40. Commencement and continuance of right of private defence of body.—The right of private
defence of the body commences as soon as a reasonable apprehension of danger to the body arises from
an attempt or threat to commit the offence though the offence may not have been committed; and it
continues as long as such apprehension of danger to the body continues.
41. When right of private defence of property extends to causing death.—The right of private
defence of property extends, under the restrictions specified in section 37, to the voluntary causing of
death or of any other harm to the wrong-doer, if the offence, the committing of which, or the attempting
to commit which, occasions the exercise of the right, be an offence of any of the descriptions hereinafter
enumerated, namely: —
(a) robbery;
(b) house-breaking after sunset and before sunrise;
(c) mischief by fire or any explosive substance committed on any building, tent or vessel, which
building, tent or vessel is used as a human dwelling, or as a place for the custody of property;
30
(d) theft, mischief, or house-trespass, under such circumstances as may reasonably cause
apprehension that death or grievous hurt will be the consequence, if such right of private defence is
not exercised.
42. When such right extends to causing any harm other than death.—If the offence, the
committing of which, or the attempting to commit which occasions the exercise of the right of private
defence, be theft, mischief, or criminal trespass, not of any of the descriptions specified in section 41, that
right does not extend to the voluntary causing of death, but does extend, subject to the restrictions
specified in section 37, to the voluntary causing to the wrong-doer of any harm other than death.
43. Commencement and continuance of right of private defence of property.—The right of
private defence of property,—
(a) commences when a reasonable apprehension of danger to the property commences;
(b) against theft continues till the offender has effected his retreat with the property or either the
assistance of the public authorities is obtained, or the property has been recovered;
(c) against robbery continues as long as the offender causes or attempts to cause to any person
death or hurt or wrongful restraint or as long as the fear of instant death or of instant hurt or of instant
personal restraint continues;
(d) against criminal trespass or mischief continues as long as the offender continues in the
commission of criminal trespass or mischief;
(e) against house-breaking after sunset and before sunrise continues as long as the house-trespass
which has been begun by such house-breaking continues.
44. Right of private defence against deadly assault when there is risk of harm to innocent
person.—If in the exercise of the right of private defence against an assault which reasonably causes the
apprehension of death, the defender be so situated that he cannot effectually exercise that right without
risk of harm to an innocent person, his right of private defence extends to the running of that risk.
Illustration.
A is attacked by a mob who attempt to murder him. He cannot effectually exercise his right of private
defence without firing on the mob, and he cannot fire without risk of harming young children who are
mingled with the mob. A commits no offence if by so firing he harms any of the children.
CHAPTER IV
OF ABETMENT, CRIMINAL CONSPIRACY AND ATTEMPT
of abetment
45. Abetment of a thing.—A person abets the doing of a thing, who—
(a) instigates any person to do that thing; or
(b) engages with one or more other person or persons in any conspiracy for the doing of that
thing, if an act or illegal omission takes place in pursuance of that conspiracy, and in order to the
doing of that thing; or
(c) intentionally aids, by any act or illegal omission, the doing of that thing.
Explanation 1.—A person who, by wilful misrepresentation, or by wilful concealment of a material
fact which he is bound to disclose, voluntarily causes or procures, or attempts to cause or procure, a thing
to be done, is said to instigate the doing of that thing.
Illustration.
A, a public officer, is authorised by a warrant from a Court to apprehend Z. B, knowing that fact and
also that C is not Z, wilfully represents to A that C is Z, and thereby intentionally causes A to apprehend
C. Here B abets by instigation the apprehension of C.
31
Explanation 2.—Whoever, either prior to or at the time of the commission of an act, does anything in
order to facilitate the commission of that act, and thereby facilitates the commission thereof, is said to aid
the doing of that act.
46. Abettor.—A person abets an offence, who abets either the commission of an offence, or the
commission of an act which would be an offence, if committed by a person capable by law of committing
an offence with the same intention or knowledge as that of the abettor.
Explanation 1.—The abetment of the illegal omission of an act may amount to an offence although
the abettor may not himself be bound to do that act.
Explanation 2.—To constitute the offence of abetment it is not necessary that the act abetted should
be committed, or that the effect requisite to constitute the offence should be caused.
Illustrations.
(a) A instigates B to murder C. B refuses to do so. A is guilty of abetting B to commit murder.
(b) A instigates B to murder D. B in pursuance of the instigation stabs D. D recovers from the wound.
A is guilty of instigating B to commit murder.
Explanation 3.—It is not necessary that the person abetted should be capable by law of committing
an offence, or that he should have the same guilty intention or knowledge as that of the abettor, or any
guilty intention or knowledge.
Illustrations.
(a) A, with a guilty intention, abets a child or a person of unsound mind to commit an act which
would be an offence, if committed by a person capable by law of committing an offence, and having the
same intention as A. Here A, whether the act be committed or not, is guilty of abetting an offence.
(b) A, with the intention of murdering Z, instigates B, a child under seven years of age, to do an act
which causes Z’s death. B, in consequence of the abetment, does the act in the absence of A and thereby
causes Z’s death. Here, though B was not capable by law of committing an offence, A is liable to be
punished in the same manner as if B had been capable by law of committing an offence, and had
committed murder, and he is therefore subject to the punishment of death.
(c) A instigates B to set fire to a dwelling-house. B, in consequence of his unsoundness of mind,
being incapable of knowing the nature of the act, or that he is doing what is wrong or contrary to law, sets
fire to the house in consequence of A’s instigation. B has committed no offence, but A is guilty of
abetting the offence of setting fire to a dwelling-house, and is liable to the punishment provided for that
offence.
(d) A, intending to cause a theft to be committed, instigates B to take property belonging to Z out of
Z’s possession. A induces B to believe that the property belongs to A. B takes the property out of Z’s
possession, in good faith, believing it to be A’s property. B, acting under this misconception, does not
take dishonestly, and therefore does not commit theft. But A is guilty of abetting theft, and is liable to the
same punishment as if B had committed theft.
Explanation 4.—The abetment of an offence being an offence, the abetment of such an abetment is
also an offence.
Illustration.
A instigates B to instigate C to murder Z. B accordingly instigates C to murder Z, and C commits that
offence in consequence of B’s instigation. B is liable to be punished for his offence with the punishment
for murder; and, as A instigated B to commit the offence, A is also liable to the same punishment.
Explanation 5.—It is not necessary to the commission of the offence of abetment by conspiracy that
the abettor should concert the offence with the person who commits it. It is sufficient if he engages in the
conspiracy in pursuance of which the offence is committed.
32
Illustration.
A concerts with B a plan for poisoning Z. It is agreed that A shall administer the poison. B then
explains the plan to C mentioning that a third person is to administer the poison, but without mentioning
A’s name. C agrees to procure the poison, and procures and delivers it to B for the purpose of its being
used in the manner explained. A administers the poison; Z dies in consequence. Here, though A and C
have not conspired together, yet C has been engaged in the conspiracy in pursuance of which Z has been
murdered. C has therefore committed the offence defined in this section and is liable to the punishment
for murder.
47. Abetment in India of offences outside India.—A person abets an offence within the meaning of
this Sanhita who, in India, abets the commission of any act without and beyond India which would
constitute an offence if committed in India.
Illustration.
A, in India, instigates B, a foreigner in country X, to commit a murder in that country, A is guilty of
abetting murder.
48. Abetment outside India for offence in India.—A person abets an offence within the meaning of
this Sanhita who, without and beyond India, abets the commission of any act in India which would
constitute an offence if committed in India.
Illustration.
A, in country X, instigates B, to commit a murder in India, A is guilty of abetting murder.
49. Punishment of abetment if act abetted is committed in consequence and where no express
provision is made for its punishment.—Whoever abets any offence shall, if the act abetted is
committed in consequence of the abetment, and no express provision is made by this Sanhita for the
punishment of such abetment, be punished with the punishment provided for the offence.
Explanation.—An act or offence is said to be committed in consequence of abetment, when it is
committed in consequence of the instigation, or in pursuance of the conspiracy, or with the aid which
constitutes the abetment.
Illustrations.
(a) A instigates B to give false evidence. B, in consequence of the instigation, commits that offence.
A is guilty of abetting that offence, and is liable to the same punishment as B.
(b) A and B conspire to poison Z. A, in pursuance of the conspiracy, procures the poison and delivers
it to B in order that he may administer it to Z. B, in pursuance of the conspiracy, administers the poison to
Z in A’s absence and thereby causes Z’s death. Here B is guilty of murder. A is guilty of abetting that
offence by conspiracy, and is liable to the punishment for murder.
50. Punishment of abetment if person abetted does act with different intention from that of
abettor.—Whoever abets the commission of an offence shall, if the person abetted does the act with a
different intention or knowledge from that of the abettor, be punished with the punishment provided for
the offence which would have been committed if the act had been done with the intention or knowledge
of the abettor and with no other.
51. Liability of abettor when one act abetted and different act done.—When an act is abetted and
a different act is done, the abettor is liable for the act done, in the same manner and to the same extent as
if he had directly abetted it:
Provided that the act done was a probable consequence of the abetment, and was committed under
the influence of the instigation, or with the aid or in pursuance of the conspiracy which constituted the
abetment.
33
Illustrations.
(a) A instigates a child to put poison into the food of Z, and gives him poison for that purpose. The
child, in consequence of the instigation, by mistake puts the poison into the food of Y, which is by the
side of that of Z. Here, if the child was acting under the influence of A’s instigation, and the act done was
under the circumstances a probable consequence of the abetment, A is liable in the same manner and to
the same extent as if he had instigated the child to put the poison into the food of Y.
(b) A instigates B to burn Z’s house, B sets fire to the house and at the same time commits theft of
property there. A, though guilty of abetting the burning of the house, is not guilty of abetting the theft; for
the theft was a distinct act, and not a probable consequence of the burning.
(c) A instigates B and C to break into an inhabited house at midnight for the purpose of robbery, and
provides them with arms for that purpose. B and C break into the house, and being resisted by Z, one of
the inmates, murder Z. Here, if that murder was the probable consequence of the abetment, A is liable to
the punishment provided for murder.
52. Abettor when liable to cumulative punishment for act abetted and for act done.—If the act
for which the abettor is liable under section 51 is committed in addition to the act abetted, and constitute
a distinct offence, the abettor is liable to punishment for each of the offences.
Illustration.
A instigates B to resist by force a distress made by a public servant. B, in consequence, resists that
distress. In offering the resistance, B voluntarily causes grievous hurt to the officer executing the distress.
As B has committed both the offence of resisting the distress, and the offence of voluntarily causing
grievous hurt, B is liable to punishment for both these offences; and, if A knew that B was likely
voluntarily to cause grievous hurt in resisting the distress, A will also be liable to punishment for each of
the offences.
53. Liability of abettor for an effect caused by act abetted different from that intended by
abettor.—When an act is abetted with the intention on the part of the abettor of causing a particular
effect, and an act for which the abettor is liable in consequence of the abetment, causes a different effect
from that intended by the abettor, the abettor is liable for the effect caused, in the same manner and to the
same extent as if he had abetted the act with the intention of causing that effect, provided he knew that
the act abetted was likely to cause that effect.
Illustration.
A instigates B to cause grievous hurt to Z. B, in consequence of the instigation, causes grievous hurt
to Z. Z dies in consequence. Here, if A knew that the grievous hurt abetted was likely to cause death, A is
liable to be punished with the punishment provided for murder.
54. Abettor present when offence is committed.—Whenever any person, who is absent would be
liable to be punished as an abettor, is present when the act or offence for which he would be punishable in
consequence of the abetment is committed, he shall be deemed to have committed such act or offence.
55. Abetment of offence punishable with death or imprisonment for life.—Whoever abets the
commission of an offence punishable with death or imprisonment for life, shall, if that offence be not
committed in consequence of the abetment, and no express provision is made under this Sanhita for the
punishment of such abetment, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine; and if any act for which the abettor is liable in
consequence of the abetment, and which causes hurt to any person, is done, the abettor shall be liable to
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to fourteen years, and shall also be liable
to fine.
Illustration.
A instigates B to murder Z. The offence is not committed. If B had murdered Z, he would have been
subject to the punishment of death or imprisonment for life. Therefore, A is liable to imprisonment for a
term which may extend to seven years and also to a fine; and if any hurt be done to Z in consequence of
34
the abetment, he will be liable to imprisonment for a term which may extend to fourteen years, and to
fine.
56. Abetment of offence punishable with imprisonment.—Whoever abets an offence punishable
with imprisonment shall, if that offence be not committed in consequence of the abetment, and no express
provision is made under this Sanhita for the punishment of such abetment, be punished with
imprisonment of any description provided for that offence for a term which may extend to one-fourth part
of the longest term provided for that offence; or with such fine as is provided for that offence, or with
both; and if the abettor or the person abetted is a public servant, whose duty it is to prevent the
commission of such offence, the abettor shall be punished with imprisonment of any description provided
for that offence, for a term which may extend to one-half of the longest term provided for that offence, or
with such fine as is provided for the offence, or with both.
Illustrations.
(a) A instigates B to give false evidence. Here, if B does not give false evidence, A has nevertheless
committed the offence defined in this section, and is punishable accordingly.
(b) A, a police officer, whose duty it is to prevent robbery, abets the commission of robbery. Here,
though the robbery be not committed, A is liable to one-half of the longest term of imprisonment
provided for that offence, and also to fine.
(c) B abets the commission of a robbery by A, a police officer, whose duty it is to prevent that
offence. Here, though the robbery be not committed, B is liable to one-half of the longest term of
imprisonment provided for the offence of robbery, and also to fine.
57. Abetting commission of offence by public or by more than ten persons.—Whoever abets the
commission of an offence by the public generally or by any number or class of persons exceeding ten,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years
and with fine.
Illustration.
A affixes in a public place a placard instigating a sect consisting of more than ten members to meet at
a certain time and place, for the purpose of attacking the members of an adverse sect, while engaged in a
procession. A has committed the offence defined in this section.
58. Concealing design to commit offence punishable with death or imprisonment for life.—
Whoever intending to facilitate or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby facilitate the commission of
an offence punishable with death or imprisonment for life, voluntarily conceals by any act or omission, or
by the use of encryption or any other information hiding tool, the existence of a design to commit such
offence or makes any representation which he knows to be false respecting such design shall,—
(a) if that offence be committed, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to seven years; or
(b) if the offence be not committed, with imprisonment of either description, for a term which
may extend to three years,
and shall also be liable to fine.
Illustration.
A, knowing that dacoity is about to be committed at B, falsely informs the Magistrate that a dacoity is
about to be committed at C, a place in an opposite direction, and thereby misleads the Magistrate with
intent to facilitate the commission of the offence. The dacoity is committed at B in pursuance of the
design. A is punishable under this section.
59. Public servant concealing design to commit offence which it is his duty to prevent.—
Whoever, being a public servant, intending to facilitate or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby
35
facilitate the commission of an offence which it is his duty as such public servant to prevent, voluntarily
conceals, by any act or omission or by the use of encryption or any other information hiding tool, the
existence of a design to commit such offence, or makes any representation which he knows to be false
respecting such design shall,—
(a) if the offence be committed, be punished with imprisonment of any description provided for
the offence, for a term which may extend to one-half of the longest term of such imprisonment, or
with such fine as is provided for that offence, or with both; or
(b) if the offence be punishable with death or imprisonment for life, with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to ten years; or
(c) if the offence be not committed, shall be punished with imprisonment of any description
provided for the offence for a term which may extend to one-fourth part of the longest term of such
imprisonment or with such fine as is provided for the offence, or with both.
Illustration.
A, an officer of police, being legally bound to give information of all designs to commit robbery
which may come to his knowledge, and knowing that B designs to commit robbery, omits to give such
information, with intent to so facilitate the commission of that offence.
Here A has by an illegal omission concealed the existence of B’s design, and is liable to punishment
according to the provision of this section.
60. Concealing design to commit offence punishable with imprisonment.—Whoever, intending to
facilitate or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby facilitate the commission of an offence punishable
with imprisonment, voluntarily conceals, by any act or illegal omission, the existence of a design to
commit such offence, or makes any representation which he knows to be false respecting such design
shall,—
(a) if the offence be committed, be punished with imprisonment of the description provided for
the offence, for a term which may extend to one-fourth; and
(b) if the offence be not committed, to one-eighth,
of the longest term of such imprisonment, or with such fine as is provided for the offence, or with both.
Of criminal conspiracy
61. Criminal conspiracy.—(1) When two or more persons agree with the common object to do, or
cause to be done—
(a) an illegal act; or
(b) an act which is not illegal by illegal means, such an agreement is designated a criminal
conspiracy:
Provided that no agreement except an agreement to commit an offence shall amount to a criminal
conspiracy unless some act besides the agreement is done by one or more parties to such agreement in
pursuance thereof.
Explanation.—It is immaterial whether the illegal act is the ultimate object of such agreement, or is
merely incidental to that object.
(2) Whoever is a party to a criminal conspiracy,—
(a) to commit an offence punishable with death, imprisonment for life or rigorous imprisonment
for a term of two years or upwards, shall, where no express provision is made in this Sanhita for the
punishment of such a conspiracy, be punished in the same manner as if he had abetted such offence;
(b) other than a criminal conspiracy to commit an offence punishable as aforesaid shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term not exceeding six months, or with fine or
with both.
36
Of attempt
62. Punishment for attempting to commit offences punishable with imprisonment for life or
other imprisonment.—Whoever attempts to commit an offence punishable by this Sanhita with
imprisonment for life or imprisonment, or to cause such an offence to be committed, and in such attempt
does any act towards the commission of the offence, shall, where no express provision is made by this
Sanhita for the punishment of such attempt, be punished with imprisonment of any description provided
for the offence, for a term which may extend to one-half of the imprisonment for life or, as the case may
be, one-half of the longest term of imprisonment provided for that offence, or with such fine as is
provided for the offence, or with both.
Illustrations.
(a) A makes an attempt to steal some jewels by breaking open a box, and finds after so opening the
box, that there is no jewel in it. He has done an act towards the commission of theft, and therefore is
guilty under this section.
(b) A makes an attempt to pick the pocket of Z by thrusting his hand into Z’s pocket. A fails in the
attempt in consequence of Z’s having nothing in his pocket. A is guilty under this section.
CHAPTER V
OF OFFENCES AGAINST WOMAN AND CHILD
Of sexual offences
63. Rape.—A man is said to commit “rape” if he—
(a) penetrates his penis, to any extent, into the vagina, mouth, urethra or anus of a woman or
makes her to do so with him or any other person; or
(b) inserts, to any extent, any object or a part of the body, not being the penis, into the vagina, the
urethra or anus of a woman or makes her to do so with him or any other person; or
(c) manipulates any part of the body of a woman so as to cause penetration into the vagina,
urethra, anus or any part of body of such woman or makes her to do so with him or any other person;
or
(d) applies his mouth to the vagina, anus, urethra of a woman or makes her to do so with him or
any other person,
under the circumstances falling under any of the following seven descriptions:—
(i) against her will;
(ii) without her consent;
(iii) with her consent, when her consent has been obtained by putting her or any person in whom
she is interested, in fear of death or of hurt;
(iv) with her consent, when the man knows that he is not her husband and that her consent is
given because she believes that he is another man to whom she is or believes herself to be lawfully
married;
(v) with her consent when, at the time of giving such consent, by reason of unsoundness of mind
or intoxication or the administration by him personally or through another of any stupefying or
unwholesome substance, she is unable to understand the nature and consequences of that to which
she gives consent;
(vi) with or without her consent, when she is under eighteen years of age;
(vii) when she is unable to communicate consent.
Explanation 1.—For the purposes of this section, “vagina” shall also include labia majora.
37
Explanation 2.—Consent means an unequivocal voluntary agreement when the woman by words,
gestures or any form of verbal or non-verbal communication, communicates willingness to participate in
the specific sexual act:
Provided that a woman who does not physically resist to the act of penetration shall not by the reason
only of that fact, be regarded as consenting to the sexual activity.
Exception 1.—A medical procedure or intervention shall not constitute rape.
Exception 2.—Sexual intercourse or sexual acts by a man with his own wife, the wife not being under
eighteen years of age, is not rape.
64. Punishment for rape.—(1) Whoever, except in the cases provided for in sub-section (2),
commits rape, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment of either description for a term which shall
not be less than ten years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.
(2) Whoever,—
(a) being a police officer, commits rape,—
(i) within the limits of the police station to which such police officer is appointed; or
(ii) in the premises of any station house; or
(iii) on a woman in such police officer’s custody or in the custody of a police officer
subordinate to such police officer; or
(b) being a public servant, commits rape on a woman in such public servant’s custody or in the
custody of a public servant subordinate to such public servant; or
(c) being a member of the armed forces deployed in an area by the Central Government or a
State Government commits rape in such area; or
(d) being on the management or on the staff of a jail, remand home or other place of custody
established by or under any law for the time being in force or of a women’s or children’s institution,
commits rape on any inmate of such jail, remand home, place or institution; or
(e) being on the management or on the staff of a hospital, commits rape on a woman in that
hospital; or
(f) being a relative, guardian or teacher of, or a person in a position of trust or authority towards
the woman, commits rape on such woman; or
(g) commits rape during communal or sectarian violence; or
(h) commits rape on a woman knowing her to be pregnant; or
(i) commits rape, on a woman incapable of giving consent; or
(j) being in a position of control or dominance over a woman, commits rape on such woman; or
(k) commits rape on a woman suffering from mental or physical disability; or
(l) while committing rape causes grievous bodily harm or maims or disfigures or endangers the
life of a woman; or
(m) commits rape repeatedly on the same woman,
shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten years, but which
may extend to imprisonment for life, which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that person’s
natural life, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section,—
(a) “armed forces” means the naval, army and air forces and includes any member of the Armed
Forces constituted under any law for the time being in force, including the paramilitary forces and
any auxiliary forces that are under the control of the Central Government or the State Government;
38
(b) “hospital” means the precincts of the hospital and includes the precincts of any institution for
the reception and treatment of persons during convalescence or of persons requiring medical attention
or rehabilitation;
(c) “police officer” shall have the same meaning as assigned to the expression “police” under the
Police Act, 1861 (5 of 1861);
(d) “women’s or children’s institution” means an institution, whether called an orphanage or a
home for neglected women or children or a widow’s home or an institution called by any other name,
which is established and maintained for the reception and care of women or children.
65. Punishment for rape in certain cases.—(1) Whoever, commits rape on a woman under sixteen
years of age shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than twenty
years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life, which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder
of that person’s natural life, and shall also be liable to fine:
Provided that such fine shall be just and reasonable to meet the medical expenses and rehabilitation
of the victim:
Provided further that any fine imposed under this sub-section shall be paid to the victim.
(2) Whoever, commits rape on a woman under twelve years of age shall be punished with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than twenty years, but which may extend to
imprisonment for life, which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that person’s natural life, and
with fine or with death:
Provided that such fine shall be just and reasonable to meet the medical expenses and rehabilitation
of the victim:
Provided further that any fine imposed under this sub-section shall be paid to the victim.
66. Punishment for causing death or resulting in persistent vegetative state of victim.—
Whoever, commits an offence punishable under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 64 and in the
course of such commission inflicts an injury which causes the death of the woman or causes the woman
to be in a persistent vegetative state, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall
not be less than twenty years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life, which shall mean
imprisonment for the remainder of that person’s natural life, or with death.
67. Sexual intercourse by husband upon his wife during separation.—Whoever has sexual
intercourse with his own wife, who is living separately, whether under a decree of separation or
otherwise, without her consent, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which shall not be less than two years but which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to
fine.
Explanation.—In this section, “sexual intercourse” shall mean any of the acts mentioned in
clauses (a) to (d) of section 63.
68. Sexual intercourse by a person in authority.—Whoever, being—
(a) in a position of authority or in a fiduciary relationship; or
(b) a public servant; or
(c) superintendent or manager of a jail, remand home or other place of custody established by or
under any law for the time being in force, or a women’s or children’s institution; or
(d) on the management of a hospital or being on the staff of a hospital,
abuses such position or fiduciary relationship to induce or seduce any woman either in his custody or
under his charge or present in the premises to have sexual intercourse with him, such sexual intercourse
not amounting to the offence of rape, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment of either description
for a term which shall not be less than five years, but which may extend to ten years, and shall also be
liable to fine.
39
Explanation 1.— In this section, “sexual intercourse” shall mean any of the acts mentioned in
clauses (a) to (d) of section 63.
Explanation 2.— For the purposes of this section, Explanation 1 to section 63 shall also be
applicable.
Explanation 3.— “Superintendent”, in relation to a jail, remand home or other place of custody or a
women’s or children’s institution, includes a person holding any other office in such jail, remand home,
place or institution by virtue of which such person can exercise any authority or control over its inmates.
Explanation 4.—The expressions “hospital” and “women’s or children’s institution” shall
respectively have the same meanings as in clauses (b) and (d) of the Explanation to sub-section (2) of
section 64.
69. Sexual intercourse by employing deceitful means, etc.—Whoever, by deceitful means or by
making promise to marry to a woman without any intention of fulfilling the same, has sexual intercourse
with her, such sexual intercourse not amounting to the offence of rape, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years and shall also be liable to
fine.
Explanation.— “deceitful means” shall include inducement for, or false promise of employment or
promotion, or marrying by suppressing identity.
70. Gang rape.—(1) Where a woman is raped by one or more persons constituting a group or acting
in furtherance of a common intention, each of those persons shall be deemed to have committed the
offence of rape and shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than
twenty years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life which shall mean imprisonment for the
remainder of that person’s natural life, and with fine:
Provided that such fine shall be just and reasonable to meet the medical expenses and rehabilitation
of the victim:
Provided further that any fine imposed under this sub-section shall be paid to the victim.
(2) Where a woman under eighteen years of age is raped by one or more persons constituting a group
or acting in furtherance of a common intention, each of those persons shall be deemed to have committed
the offence of rape and shall be punished with imprisonment for life, which shall mean imprisonment for
the remainder of that person’s natural life, and with fine, or with death:
Provided that such fine shall be just and reasonable to meet the medical expenses and rehabilitation
of the victim:
Provided further that any fine imposed under this sub-section shall be paid to the victim.
71. Punishment for repeat offenders.—Whoever has been previously convicted of an offence
punishable under section 64 or section 65 or section 66 or section 70 and is subsequently convicted of an
offence punishable under any of the said sections shall be punished with imprisonment for life which
shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that person’s natural life, or with death.
72. Disclosure of identity of victim of certain offences, etc.—(1) Whoever prints or publishes the
name or any matter which may make known the identity of any person against whom an offence under
section 64 or section 65 or section 66 or section 67 or section 68 or section 69 or section 70 or section 71
is alleged or found to have been committed (hereafter in this section referred to as the victim) shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years and shall also
be liable to fine.
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) extends to any printing or publication of the name or any matter which
may make known the identity of the victim if such printing or publication is—
(a) by or under the order in writing of the officer-in-charge of the police station or the police
officer making the investigation into such offence acting in good faith for the purposes of such
investigation; or
40
(b) by, or with the authorisation in writing of, the victim; or
(c) where the victim is dead or a child or of unsound mind, by, or with the authorisation in
writing of, the next of kin of the victim:
Provided that no such authorisation shall be given by the next of kin to anybody other than the
chairman or the secretary, by whatever name called, of any recognised welfare institution or organisation.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, “recognised welfare institution or organisation”
means a social welfare institution or organisation recognised in this behalf by the Central Government or
the State Government.
73. Printing or publishing any matter relating to Court proceedings without permission.—
Whoever prints or publishes any matter in relation to any proceeding before a Court with respect to an
offence referred to in section 72 without the previous permission of such Court shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years and shall also be liable to
fine.
Explanation.—The printing or publication of the judgment of any High Court or the Supreme Court
does not amount to an offence within the meaning of this section.
Of criminal force and assault against woman
74. Assault or use of criminal force to woman with intent to outrage her modesty.—Whoever
assaults or uses criminal force to any woman, intending to outrage or knowing it to be likely that he will
thereby outrage her modesty, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
shall not be less than one year but which may extend to five years, and shall also be liable to fine.
75. Sexual harassment.—(1) A man committing any of the following acts:—
(i) physical contact and advances involving unwelcome and explicit sexual overtures; or
(ii) a demand or request for sexual favours; or
(iii) showing pornography against the will of a woman; or
(iv) making sexually coloured remarks,
shall be guilty of the offence of sexual harassment.
(2) Any man who commits the offence specified in clause (i) or clause (ii) or clause (iii) of
sub-section (1) shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years,
or with fine, or with both.
(3) Any man who commits the offence specified in clause (iv) of sub-section (1) shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with
both.
76. Assault or use of criminal force to woman with intent to disrobe.—Whoever assaults or uses
criminal force to any woman or abets such act with the intention of disrobing or compelling her to be
naked, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than
three years but which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
77. Voyeurism.—Whoever watches, or captures the image of a woman engaging in a private act in
circumstances where she would usually have the expectation of not being observed either by the
perpetrator or by any other person at the behest of the perpetrator or disseminates such image shall be
punished on first conviction with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less
than one year, but which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine, and be punished on a
second or subsequent conviction, with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be
less than three years, but which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation 1.—For the purposes of this section, “private act” includes an act of watching carried out
in a place which, in the circumstances, would reasonably be expected to provide privacy and where the
41
victim’s genitals, posterior or breasts are exposed or covered only in underwear; or the victim is using a
lavatory; or the victim is doing a sexual act that is not of a kind ordinarily done in public.
Explanation 2.—Where the victim consents to the capture of the images or any act, but not to their
dissemination to third persons and where such image or act is disseminated, such dissemination shall be
considered an offence under this section.
78. Stalking.—(1) Any man who—
(i) follows a woman and contacts, or attempts to contact such woman to foster personal
interaction repeatedly despite a clear indication of disinterest by such woman; or
(ii) monitors the use by a woman of the internet, e-mail or any other form of electronic
communication,
commits the offence of stalking:
Provided that such conduct shall not amount to stalking if the man who pursued it proves that—
(i) it was pursued for the purpose of preventing or detecting crime and the man accused of
stalking had been entrusted with the responsibility of prevention and detection of crime by the State;
or
(ii) it was pursued under any law or to comply with any condition or requirement imposed by any
person under any law; or
(iii) in the particular circumstances such conduct was reasonable and justified.
(2) Whoever commits the offence of stalking shall be punished on first conviction with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine; and be
punished on a second or subsequent conviction, with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to five years, and shall also be liable to fine.
79. Word, gesture or act intended to insult modesty of a woman.—Whoever, intending to insult
the modesty of any woman, utters any words, makes any sound or gesture, or exhibits any object in any
form, intending that such word or sound shall be heard, or that such gesture or object shall be seen, by
such woman, or intrudes upon the privacy of such woman, shall be punished with simple imprisonment
for a term which may extend to three years, and also with fine.
Of offences relating to marriage
80. Dowry death.—(1) Where the death of a woman is caused by any burns or bodily injury or
occurs otherwise than under normal circumstances within seven years of her marriage and it is shown that
soon before her death she was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or any relative of her
husband for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry, such death shall be called “dowry death”, and
such husband or relative shall be deemed to have caused her death.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, “dowry” shall have the same meaning as in
section 2 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 (28 of 1961).
(2) Whoever commits dowry death shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be
less than seven years but which may extend to imprisonment for life.
81. Cohabitation caused by man deceitfully inducing belief of lawful marriage.—Every man who
by deceit causes any woman who is not lawfully married to him to believe that she is lawfully married to
him and to cohabit or have sexual intercourse with him in that belief, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to
fine.
82. Marrying again during lifetime of husband or wife.—(1) Whoever, having a husband or wife
living, marries in any case in which such marriage is void by reason of its taking place during the life of
such husband or wife, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
42
Exception.—This sub-section does not extend to any person whose marriage with such husband or
wife has been declared void by a Court of competent jurisdiction, nor to any person who contracts a
marriage during the life of a former husband or wife, if such husband or wife, at the time of the
subsequent marriage, shall have been continually absent from such person for the space of seven years,
and shall not have been heard of by such person as being alive within that time provided the person
contracting such subsequent marriage shall, before such marriage takes place, inform the person with
whom such marriage is contracted of the real state of facts so far as the same are within his or her
knowledge.
(2) Whoever commits the offence under sub-section (1) having concealed from the person with
whom the subsequent marriage is contracted, the fact of the former marriage, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to
fine.
83. Marriage ceremony fraudulently gone through without lawful marriage.—Whoever,
dishonestly or with a fraudulent intention, goes through the ceremony of being married, knowing that he
is not thereby lawfully married, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
84. Enticing or taking away or detaining with criminal intent a married woman.—Whoever
takes or entices away any woman who is and whom he knows or has reason to believe to be the wife of
any other man, with intent that she may have illicit intercourse with any person, or conceals or detains
with that intent any such woman, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
85. Husband or relative of husband of a woman subjecting her to cruelty.—Whoever, being the
husband or the relative of the husband of a woman, subjects such woman to cruelty shall be punished
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine.
86. Cruelty defined.—For the purposes of section 85, “cruelty” means—
(a) any wilful conduct which is of such a nature as is likely to drive the woman to commit suicide
or to cause grave injury or danger to life, limb or health (whether mental or physical) of the woman;
or
(b) harassment of the woman where such harassment is with a view to coercing her or any person
related to her to meet any unlawful demand for any property or valuable security or is on account of
failure by her or any person related to her to meet such demand.
 87. Kidnapping, abducting or inducing woman to compel her marriage, etc.—Whoever kidnaps
or abducts any woman with intent that she may be compelled, or knowing it to be likely that she will be
compelled, to marry any person against her will, or in order that she may be forced or seduced to illicit
intercourse, or knowing it to be likely that she will be forced or seduced to illicit intercourse, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also
be liable to fine; and whoever, by means of criminal intimidation as defined in this Sanhita or of abuse of
authority or any other method of compulsion, induces any woman to go from any place with intent that
she may be, or knowing that it is likely that she will be, forced or seduced to illicit intercourse with
another person shall also be punishable as aforesaid.
Of causing miscarriage, etc.
88. Causing miscarriage.—Whoever voluntarily causes a woman with child to miscarry, shall, if
such miscarriage be not caused in good faith for the purpose of saving the life of the woman, be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with
both; and, if the woman be quick with child, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation.—A woman who causes herself to miscarry, is within the meaning of this section.
89. Causing miscarriage without woman’s consent.—Whoever commits the offence under
section 88 without the consent of the woman, whether the woman is quick with child or not, shall be
43
punished with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
90. Death caused by act done with intent to cause miscarriage.—(1) Whoever, with intent to
cause the miscarriage of a woman with child, does any act which causes the death of such woman, shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall
also be liable to fine.
(2) Where the act referred to in sub-section (1) is done without the consent of the woman, shall be
punishable either with imprisonment for life, or with the punishment specified in said sub-section.
Explanation.—It is not essential to this offence that the offender should know that the act is likely to
cause death.
91. Act done with intent to prevent child being born alive or to cause to die after birth.—
Whoever before the birth of any child does any act with the intention of thereby preventing that child
from being born alive or causing it to die after its birth, and does by such act prevent that child from
being born alive, or causes it to die after its birth, shall, if such act be not caused in good faith for the
purpose of saving the life of the mother, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to ten years, or with fine, or with both.
92. Causing death of quick unborn child by act amounting to culpable homicide.—Whoever
does any act under such circumstances, that if he thereby caused death he would be guilty of culpable
homicide, and does by such act cause the death of a quick unborn child, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to
fine.
Illustration.
A, knowing that he is likely to cause the death of a pregnant woman, does an act which, if it caused
the death of the woman, would amount to culpable homicide. The woman is injured, but does not die; but
the death of an unborn quick child with which she is pregnant is thereby caused. A is guilty of the offence
defined in this section.
Of offences against child
93. Exposure and abandonment of child under twelve years of age, by parent or person having
care of it.—Whoever being the father or mother of a child under the age of twelve years, or having the
care of such child, shall expose or leave such child in any place with the intention of wholly abandoning
such child, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
seven years, or with fine, or with both.
Explanation.—This section is not intended to prevent the trial of the offender for murder or culpable
homicide, as the case may be, if the child die in consequence of the exposure.
94. Concealment of birth by secret disposal of dead body.—Whoever, by secretly burying or
otherwise disposing of the dead body of a child whether such child die before or after or during its birth,
intentionally conceals or endeavours to conceal the birth of such child, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
95. Hiring, employing or engaging a child to commit an offence.—Whoever hires, employs or
engages any child to commit an offence shall be punished with imprisonment of either description which
shall not be less than three years but which may extend to ten years, and with fine; and if the offence be
committed shall also be punished with the punishment provided for that offence as if the offence has been
committed by such person himself.
Explanation.—Hiring, employing, engaging or using a child for sexual exploitation or pornography is
covered within the meaning of this section.
96. Procuration of child.—Whoever, by any means whatsoever, induces any child to go from any
place or to do any act with intent that such child may be, or knowing that it is likely that such child will
44
be, forced or seduced to illicit intercourse with another person shall be punishable with imprisonment
which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
97. Kidnapping or abducting child under ten years of age with intent to steal from its person.—
Whoever kidnaps or abducts any child under the age of ten years with the intention of taking dishonestly
any movable property from the person of such child, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
98. Selling child for purposes of prostitution, etc.—Whoever sells, lets to hire, or otherwise
disposes of any child with intent that such child shall at any age be employed or used for the purpose of
prostitution or illicit intercourse with any person or for any unlawful and immoral purpose, or knowing it
to be likely that such child will at any age be employed or used for any such purpose, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable
to fine.
Explanation 1.—When a female under the age of eighteen years is sold, let for hire, or otherwise
disposed of to a prostitute or to any person who keeps or manages a brothel, the person so disposing of
such female shall, until the contrary is proved, be presumed to have disposed of her with the intent that
she shall be used for the purpose of prostitution.
Explanation 2.—For the purposes of this section “illicit intercourse” means sexual intercourse
between persons not united by marriage or by any union or tie which, though not amounting to a
marriage, is recognised by the personal law or custom of the community to which they belong or, where
they belong to different communities, of both such communities, as constituting between them a
quasi-marital relation.
99. Buying child for purposes of prostitution, etc.—Whoever buys, hires or otherwise obtains
possession of any child with intent that such child shall at any age be employed or used for the purpose of
prostitution or illicit intercourse with any person or for any unlawful and immoral purpose, or knowing it
to be likely that such child will at any age be employed or used for any such purpose, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than seven years but which
may extend to fourteen years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation 1.—Any prostitute or any person keeping or managing a brothel, who buys, hires or
otherwise obtains possession of a female under the age of eighteen years shall, until the contrary is
proved, be presumed to have obtained possession of such female with the intent that she shall be used for
the purpose of prostitution.
Explanation 2.— “Illicit intercourse” has the same meaning as in section 98.
CHAPTER VI
OF OFFENCES AFFECTING THE HUMAN BODY
Of offences affecting life
100. Culpable homicide.—Whoever causes death by doing an act with the intention of causing
death, or with the intention of causing such bodily injury as is likely to cause death, or with the
knowledge that he is likely by such act to cause death, commits the offence of culpable homicide.
Illustrations.
(a) A lays sticks and turf over a pit, with the intention of thereby causing death, or with the
knowledge that death is likely to be thereby caused. Z, believing the ground to be firm, treads on it, falls
in and is killed. A has committed the offence of culpable homicide.
(b) A knows Z to be behind a bush. B does not know it. A, intending to cause, or knowing it to be
likely to cause Z’s death, induces B to fire at the bush. B fires and kills Z. Here B may be guilty of no
offence; but A has committed the offence of culpable homicide.
(c) A, by shooting at a fowl with intent to kill and steal it, kills B, who is behind a bush; A not
knowing that he was there. Here, although A was doing an unlawful act, he was not guilty of culpable
45
homicide, as he did not intend to kill B, or to cause death by doing an act that he knew was likely to cause
death.
Explanation 1.—A person who causes bodily injury to another who is labouring under a disorder,
disease or bodily infirmity, and thereby accelerates the death of that other, shall be deemed to have
caused his death.
Explanation 2.—Where death is caused by bodily injury, the person who causes such bodily injury
shall be deemed to have caused the death, although by resorting to proper remedies and skilful treatment
the death might have been prevented.
Explanation 3.—The causing of the death of a child in the mother’s womb is not homicide. But it
may amount to culpable homicide to cause the death of a living child, if any part of that child has been
brought forth, though the child may not have breathed or been completely born.
101. Murder.—Except in the cases hereinafter excepted, culpable homicide is murder,—
(a) if the act by which the death is caused is done with the intention of causing death; or
(b) if the act by which the death is caused is done with the intention of causing such bodily injury
as the offender knows to be likely to cause the death of the person to whom the harm is caused; or
(c) if the act by which the death is caused is done with the intention of causing bodily injury to
any person and the bodily injury intended to be inflicted is sufficient in the ordinary course of nature
to cause death; or
(d) if the person committing the act by which the death is caused, knows that it is so imminently
dangerous that it must, in all probability, cause death, or such bodily injury as is likely to cause death,
and commits such act without any excuse for incurring the risk of causing death or such injury as
aforesaid.
Illustrations.
(a) A shoots Z with the intention of killing him. Z dies in consequence. A commits murder.
(b) A, knowing that Z is labouring under such a disease that a blow is likely to cause his death, strikes
him with the intention of causing bodily injury. Z dies in consequence of the blow. A is guilty of murder,
although the blow might not have been sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause the death of a
person in a sound state of health. But if A, not knowing that Z is labouring under any disease, gives him
such a blow as would not in the ordinary course of nature kill a person in a sound state of health, here A,
although he may intend to cause bodily injury, is not guilty of murder, if he did not intend to cause death,
or such bodily injury as in the ordinary course of nature would cause death.
(c) A intentionally gives Z a sword-cut or club-wound sufficient to cause the death of a man in the
ordinary course of nature. Z dies in consequence. Here A is guilty of murder, although he may not have
intended to cause Z’s death.
(d) A without any excuse fires a loaded cannon into a crowd of persons and kills one of them. A is
guilty of murder, although he may not have had a premeditated design to kill any particular individual.
Exception 1.—Culpable homicide is not murder if the offender, whilst deprived of the power of
self-control by grave and sudden provocation, causes the death of the person who gave the provocation or
causes the death of any other person by mistake or accident:
Provided that the provocation is not,—
(a) sought or voluntarily provoked by the offender as an excuse for killing or doing harm to any
person;
(b) given by anything done in obedience to the law, or by a public servant in the lawful exercise
of the powers of such public servant;
(c) given by anything done in the lawful exercise of the right of private defence.
46
Explanation.—Whether the provocation was grave and sudden enough to prevent the offence from
amounting to murder is a question of fact.
Illustrations.
(a) A, under the influence of passion excited by a provocation given by Z, intentionally kills Y,
Z’s child. This is murder, in as much as the provocation was not given by the child, and the death of
the child was not caused by accident or misfortune in doing an act caused by the provocation.
(b) Y gives grave and sudden provocation to A. A, on this provocation, fires a pistol at Y, neither
intending nor knowing himself to be likely to kill Z, who is near him, but out of sight. A kills Z. Here
A has not committed murder, but merely culpable homicide.
(c) A is lawfully arrested by Z, a bailiff. A is excited to sudden and violent passion by the arrest,
and kills Z. This is murder, in as much as the provocation was given by a thing done by a public
servant in the exercise of his powers.
(d) A appears as a witness before Z, a Magistrate. Z says that he does not believe a word of A’s
deposition, and that A has perjured himself. A is moved to sudden passion by these words, and kills Z.
This is murder.
(e) A attempts to pull Z’s nose. Z, in the exercise of the right of private defence, lays hold of A to
prevent him from doing so. A is moved to sudden and violent passion in consequence, and kills Z.
This is murder, in as much as the provocation was giving by a thing done in the exercise of the right of
private defence.
(f) Z strikes B. B is by this provocation excited to violent rage. A, a bystander, intending to take
advantage of B’s rage, and to cause him to kill Z, puts a knife into B’s hand for that purpose. B kills Z
with the knife. Here B may have committed only culpable homicide, but A is guilty of murder.
Exception 2.—Culpable homicide is not murder if the offender in the exercise in good faith of the
right of private defence of person or property, exceeds the power given to him by law and causes the
death of the person against whom he is exercising such right of defence without premeditation, and
without any intention of doing more harm than is necessary for the purpose of such defence.
Illustration.
Z attempts to horsewhip A, not in such a manner as to cause grievous hurt to A. A draws out a pistol.
Z persists in the assault. A believing in good faith that he can by no other means prevent himself from
being horsewhipped, shoots Z dead. A has not committed murder, but only culpable homicide.
Exception 3.—Culpable homicide is not murder if the offender, being a public servant or aiding a
public servant acting for the advancement of public justice, exceeds the powers given to him by law, and
causes death by doing an act which he, in good faith, believes to be lawful and necessary for the due
discharge of his duty as such public servant and without ill-will towards the person whose death is
caused.
Exception 4.—Culpable homicide is not murder if it is committed without premeditation in a sudden
fight in the heat of passion upon a sudden quarrel and without the offender’s having taken undue
advantage or acted in a cruel or unusual manner.
Explanation.—It is immaterial in such cases which party offers the provocation or commits the first
assault.
Exception 5.—Culpable homicide is not murder when the person whose death is caused, being above
the age of eighteen years, suffers death or takes the risk of death with his own consent.
Illustration.
A, by instigation, voluntarily causes Z, a child to commit suicide. Here, on account of Z’s youth, he
was incapable of giving consent to his own death; A has therefore abetted murder.
102. Culpable homicide by causing death of person other than person whose death was
intended.—If a person, by doing anything which he intends or knows to be likely to cause death,
47
commits culpable homicide by causing the death of any person, whose death he neither intends nor
knows himself to be likely to cause, the culpable homicide committed by the offender is of the
description of which it would have been if he had caused the death of the person whose death he intended
or knew himself to be likely to cause.
103. Punishment for murder.—(1) Whoever commits murder shall be punished with death or
imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.
(2) When a group of five or more persons acting in concert commits murder on the ground of race,
caste or community, sex, place of birth, language, personal belief or any other similar ground each
member of such group shall be punished with death or with imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable
to fine.
104. Punishment for murder by life-convict.—Whoever, being under sentence of imprisonment for
life, commits murder, shall be punished with death or with imprisonment for life, which shall mean the
remainder of that person’s natural life.
105. Punishment for culpable homicide not amounting to murder.—Whoever commits culpable
homicide not amounting to murder, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or imprisonment of
either description for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to ten years,
and shall also be liable to fine, if the act by which the death is caused is done with the intention of
causing death, or of causing such bodily injury as is likely to cause death; or with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to ten years and with fine, if the act is done with the knowledge
that it is likely to cause death, but without any intention to cause death, or to cause such bodily injury as
is likely to cause death.
106. Causing death by negligence.—(1) Whoever causes death of any person by doing any rash or
negligent act not amounting to culpable homicide, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to five years, and shall also be liable to fine; and if such act is
done by a registered medical practitioner while performing medical procedure, he shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, and shall also be liable to
fine.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, “registered medical practitioner” means a
medical practitioner who possesses any medical qualification recognised under the National Medical
Commission Act, 2019 (30 of 2019) and whose name has been entered in the National Medical Register
or a State Medical Register under that Act.
(2) Whoever causes death of any person by rash and negligent driving of vehicle not amounting to
culpable homicide, and escapes without reporting it to a police officer or a Magistrate soon after the
incident, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description of a term which may extend to ten
years, and shall also be liable to fine.
107. Abetment of suicide of child or person of unsound mind.—If any child, any person of
unsound mind, any delirious person or any person in a state of intoxication, commits suicide, whoever
abets the commission of such suicide, shall be punished with death or imprisonment for life, or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
108. Abetment of suicide.—If any person commits suicide, whoever abets the commission of such
suicide, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten
years, and shall also be liable to fine.
109. Attempt to murder.—(1) Whoever does any act with such intention or knowledge, and under
such circumstances that, if he by that act caused death, he would be guilty of murder, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable
to fine; and if hurt is caused to any person by such act, the offender shall be liable either to imprisonment
for life, or to such punishment as is hereinbefore mentioned.
48
(2) When any person offending under sub-section (1) is under sentence of imprisonment for life, he
may, if hurt is caused, be punished with death or with imprisonment for life, which shall mean the
remainder of that person’s natural life.
Illustrations.
(a) A shoots at Z with intention to kill him, under such circumstances that, if death ensued, A would
be guilty of murder. A is liable to punishment under this section.
(b) A, with the intention of causing the death of a child of tender years, exposes it in a desert place. A
has committed the offence defined by this section, though the death of the child does not ensue.
(c) A, intending to murder Z, buys a gun and loads it. A has not yet committed the offence. A fires
the gun at Z. He has committed the offence defined in this section, and, if by such firing he wounds Z, he
is liable to the punishment provided by the latter part of sub-section (1).
(d) A, intending to murder Z by poison, purchases poison and mixes the same with food which
remains in A’s keeping; A has not yet committed the offence defined in this section. A places the food on
Z’s table or delivers it to Z’s servants to place it on Z’s table. A has committed the offence defined in this
section.
110. Attempt to commit culpable homicide.—Whoever does any act with such intention or
knowledge and under such circumstances that, if he by that act caused death, he would be guilty of
culpable homicide not amounting to murder, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both; and, if hurt is caused to any person
by such act, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
seven years, or with fine, or with both.
Illustration
A, on grave and sudden provocation, fires a pistol at Z, under such circumstances that if he thereby
caused death, he would be guilty of culpable homicide not amounting to murder. A has committed the
offence defined in this section.
111. Organised crime.—(1) Any continuing unlawful activity including kidnapping, robbery,
vehicle theft, extortion, land grabbing, contract killing, economic offence, cyber-crimes, trafficking of
persons, drugs, weapons or illicit goods or services, human trafficking for prostitution or ransom, by any
person or a group of persons acting in concert, singly or jointly, either as a member of an organised crime
syndicate or on behalf of such syndicate, by use of violence, threat of violence, intimidation, coercion, or
by any other unlawful means to obtain direct or indirect material benefit including a financial benefit,
shall constitute organised crime.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section,—
(i) “organised crime syndicate” means a group of two or more persons who, acting either singly
or jointly, as a syndicate or gang indulge in any continuing unlawful activity;
(ii) “continuing unlawful activity” means an activity prohibited by law which is a cognizable
offence punishable with imprisonment of three years or more, undertaken by any person, either singly
or jointly, as a member of an organised crime syndicate or on behalf of such syndicate in respect of
which more than one charge-sheets have been filed before a competent Court within the preceding
period of ten years and that Court has taken cognizance of such offence, and includes economic
offence;
(iii) “economic offence” includes criminal breach of trust, forgery, counterfeiting of currencynotes, bank-notes and Government stamps, hawala transaction, mass-marketing fraud or running any
scheme to defraud several persons or doing any act in any manner with a view to defraud any bank or
financial institution or any other institution or organisation for obtaining monetary benefits in any
form.
(2) Whoever commits organised crime shall,—
49
(a) if such offence has resulted in the death of any person, be punished with death or
imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than ten lakh rupees;
(b) in any other case, be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five
years but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine which shall not
be less than five lakh rupees.
(3) Whoever abets, attempts, conspires or knowingly facilitates the commission of an organised
crime, or otherwise engages in any act preparatory to an organised crime, shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment
for life, and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than five lakh rupees.
(4) Any person who is a member of an organised crime syndicate shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment
for life, and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than five lakh rupees.
(5) Whoever, intentionally, harbours or conceals any person who has committed the offence of an
organised crime shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years
but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than
five lakh rupees:
Provided that this sub-section shall not apply to any case in which the harbour or concealment is by
the spouse of the offender.
(6) Whoever possesses any property derived or obtained from the commission of an organised crime
or proceeds of any organised crime or which has been acquired through the organised crime, shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years but which may extend to
imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than two lakh rupees.
(7) If any person on behalf of a member of an organised crime syndicate is, or at any time has been in
possession of movable or immovable property which he cannot satisfactorily account for, shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years but which may extend to
imprisonment for ten years and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees.
112. Petty organised crime.—(1) Whoever, being a member of a group or gang, either singly or
jointly, commits any act of theft, snatching, cheating, unauthorised selling of tickets, unauthorised betting
or gambling, selling of public examination question papers or any other similar criminal act, is said to
commit petty organised crime.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section “theft” includes trick theft, theft from vehicle,
dwelling house or business premises, cargo theft, pick pocketing, theft through card skimming,
shoplifting and theft of Automated Teller Machine.
(2) Whoever commits any petty organised crime shall be punished with imprisonment for a term
which shall not be less than one year but which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
113. Terrorist act.—(1) Whoever does any act with the intent to threaten or likely to threaten the
unity, integrity, sovereignty, security, or economic security of India or with the intent to strike terror or
likely to strike terror in the people or any section of the people in India or in any foreign country,—
(a) by using bombs, dynamite or other explosive substance or inflammable substance or firearms
or other lethal weapons or poisonous or noxious gases or other chemicals or by any other substance
(whether biological, radioactive, nuclear or otherwise) of a hazardous nature or by any other means
of whatever nature to cause or likely to cause,—
(i) death of, or injury to, any person or persons; or
(ii) loss of, or damage to, or destruction of, property; or
(iii) disruption of any supplies or services essential to the life of the community in India or in
any foreign country; or
50
(iv) damage to, the monetary stability of India by way of production or smuggling or
circulation of counterfeit Indian paper currency, coin or of any other material; or
(v) damage or destruction of any property in India or in a foreign country used or intended to
be used for the defence of India or in connection with any other purposes of the Government of
India, any State Government or any of their agencies; or
(b) overawes by means of criminal force or the show of criminal force or attempts to do so or
causes death of any public functionary or attempts to cause death of any public functionary; or
(c) detains, kidnaps or abducts any person and threatening to kill or injure such person or does
any other act in order to compel the Government of India, any State Government or the Government
of a foreign country or an international or inter-governmental organisation or any other person to do
or abstain from doing any act,
commit a terrorist act.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this sub-section,—
(a) “public functionary” means the constitutional authorities or any other functionary notified in
the Official Gazette by the Central Government as public functionary;
(b) “counterfeit Indian currency” means the counterfeit currency as may be declared after
examination by an authorised or notified forensic authority that such currency imitates or
compromises with the key security features of Indian currency.
(2) Whoever commits a terrorist act shall,—
(a) if such offence has resulted in the death of any person, be punished with death or
imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine;
(b) in any other case, be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five
years but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.
(3) Whoever conspires or attempts to commit, or advocates, abets, advises or incites, directly or
knowingly facilitates the commission of a terrorist act or any act preparatory to the commission of a
terrorist act, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years but
which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.
(4) Whoever organises or causes to be organised any camp or camps for imparting training in terrorist
act, or recruits or causes to be recruited any person or persons for commission of a terrorist act, shall be
punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to
imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.
(5) Any person who is a member of an organisation which is involved in terrorist act, shall be
punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be
liable to fine.
(6) Whoever voluntarily harbours or conceals, or attempts to harbour or conceal any person knowing
that such person has committed a terrorist act shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall
not be less than three years but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to
fine:
Provided that this sub-section shall not apply to any case in which the harbour or concealment is by
the spouse of the offender.
(7) Whoever knowingly possesses any property derived or obtained from commission of any terrorist
act or acquired through the commission of any terrorist act shall be punished with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the officer not below the rank of
Superintendent of Police shall decide whether to register the case under this section or under the
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 (37 of 1967).
51
Of hurt
114. Hurt.—Whoever causes bodily pain, disease or infirmity to any person is said to cause hurt.
115. Voluntarily causing hurt.—(1) Whoever does any act with the intention of thereby causing
hurt to any person, or with the knowledge that he is likely thereby to cause hurt to any person, and does
thereby cause hurt to any person, is said “voluntarily to cause hurt”.
(2) Whoever, except in the case provided for by sub-section (1) of section 122 voluntarily causes
hurt, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year,
or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both.
116. Grievous hurt.—The following kinds of hurt only are designated as “grievous”, namely:—
(a) Emasculation;
(b) Permanent privation of the sight of either eye;
(c) Permanent privation of the hearing of either ear;
(d) Privation of any member or joint;
(e) Destruction or permanent impairing of the powers of any member or joint;
(f) Permanent disfiguration of the head or face;
(g) Fracture or dislocation of a bone or tooth;
(h) Any hurt which endangers life or which causes the sufferer to be during the space of fifteen
days in severe bodily pain, or unable to follow his ordinary pursuits.
117. Voluntarily causing grievous hurt.—(1) Whoever voluntarily causes hurt, if the hurt which he
intends to cause or knows himself to be likely to cause is grievous hurt, and if the hurt which he causes is
grievous hurt, is said “voluntarily to cause grievous hurt”.
Explanation.—A person is not said voluntarily to cause grievous hurt except when he both causes
grievous hurt and intends or knows himself to be likely to cause grievous hurt. But he is said voluntarily
to cause grievous hurt, if intending or knowing himself to be likely to cause grievous hurt of one kind, he
actually causes grievous hurt of another kind.
Illustration.
A, intending of knowing himself to be likely permanently to disfigure Z’s face, gives Z a blow which
does not permanently disfigure Z’s face, but which causes Z to suffer severe bodily pain for the space of
fifteen days. A has voluntarily caused grievous hurt.
(2) Whoever, except in the case provided for by sub-section (2) of section 122, voluntarily causes
grievous hurt, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(3) Whoever commits an offence under sub-section (1) and in the course of such commission causes
any hurt to a person which causes that person to be in permanent disability or in persistent vegetative
state, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten years but
which may extend to imprisonment for life, which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that
person’s natural life.
(4) When a group of five or more persons acting in concert, causes grievous hurt to a person on the
ground of his race, caste or community, sex, place of birth, language, personal belief or any other similar
ground, each member of such group shall be guilty of the offence of causing grievous hurt, and shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall
also be liable to fine.
118. Voluntarily causing hurt or grievous hurt by dangerous weapons or means.—(1) Whoever,
except in the case provided for by sub-section (1) of section 122, voluntarily causes hurt by means of any
instrument for shooting, stabbing or cutting, or any instrument which, used as a weapon of offence, is
52
likely to cause death, or by means of fire or any heated substance, or by means of any poison or any
corrosive substance, or by means of any explosive substance, or by means of any substance which it is
deleterious to the human body to inhale, to swallow, or to receive into the blood, or by means of any
animal, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three
years, or with fine which may extend to twenty thousand rupees, or with both.
(2) Whoever, except in the case provided for by sub-section (2) of section 122, voluntarily causes
grievous hurt by any means referred to in sub-section (1), shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or
with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than one year but which may
extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
119. Voluntarily causing hurt or grievous hurt to extort property, or to constrain to an illegal
act.—(1) Whoever voluntarily causes hurt for the purpose of extorting from the sufferer, or from any
person interested in the sufferer, any property or valuable security, or of constraining the sufferer or any
person interested in such sufferer to do anything which is illegal or which may facilitate the commission
of an offence, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(2) Whoever voluntarily causes grievous hurt for any purpose referred to in sub-section (1), shall be
punished with imprisonment for life, or imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend
to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
120. Voluntarily causing hurt or grievous hurt to extort confession, or to compel restoration of
property.—(1) Whoever voluntarily causes hurt for the purpose of extorting from the sufferer or from
any person interested in the sufferer, any confession or any information which may lead to the detection
of an offence or misconduct, or for the purpose of constraining the sufferer or any person interested in the
sufferer to restore or to cause the restoration of any property or valuable security or to satisfy any claim
or demand, or to give information which may lead to the restoration of any property or valuable security,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years,
and shall also be liable to fine.
Illustrations.
(a) A, a police officer, tortures Z in order to induce Z to confess that he committed a crime. A is
guilty of an offence under this section.
(b) A, a police officer, tortures B to induce him to point out where certain stolen property is
deposited. A is guilty of an offence under this section.
(c) A, a revenue officer, tortures Z in order to compel him to pay certain arrears of revenue due from
Z. A is guilty of an offence under this section.
(2) Whoever voluntarily causes grievous hurt for any purpose referred to in sub-section (1), shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also
be liable to fine.
121. Voluntarily causing hurt or grievous hurt to deter public servant from his duty.—(1)
Whoever voluntarily causes hurt to any person being a public servant in the discharge of his duty as such
public servant, or with intent to prevent or deter that person or any other public servant from discharging
his duty as such public servant or in consequence of anything done or attempted to be done by that person
in the lawful discharge of his duty as such public servant, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine, or with both.
(2) Whoever voluntarily causes grievous hurt to any person being a public servant in the discharge of
his duty as such public servant, or with intent to prevent or deter that person or any other public servant
from discharging his duty as such public servant or in consequence of anything done or attempted to be
done by that person in the lawful discharge of his duty as such public servant, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than one year but which may extend
to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
53
122. Voluntarily causing hurt or grievous hurt on provocation.—(1) Whoever voluntarily causes
hurt on grave and sudden provocation, if he neither intends nor knows himself to be likely to cause hurt
to any person other than the person who gave the provocation, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to five
thousand rupees, or with both.
(2) Whoever voluntarily causes grievous hurt on grave and sudden provocation, if he neither intends
nor knows himself to be likely to cause grievous hurt to any person other than the person who gave the
provocation, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
five years, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both.
Explanation.—This section is subject to the same proviso as Exception 1 of section 101.
123. Causing hurt by means of poison, etc., with intent to commit an offence.—Whoever
administers to or causes to be taken by any person any poison or any stupefying, intoxicating or
unwholesome drug, or other thing with intent to cause hurt to such person, or with intent to commit or to
facilitate the commission of an offence or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby cause hurt, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also
be liable to fine.
124. Voluntarily causing grievous hurt by use of acid, etc.—(1) Whoever causes permanent or
partial damage or deformity to, or burns or maims or disfigures or disables, any part or parts of the body
of a person or causes grievous hurt by throwing acid on or by administering acid to that person, or by
using any other means with the intention of causing or with the knowledge that he is likely to cause such
injury or hurt or causes a person to be in a permanent vegetative state shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than ten years but which may extend
to imprisonment for life, and with fine:
Provided that such fine shall be just and reasonable to meet the medical expenses of the treatment of
the victim:
Provided further that any fine imposed under this sub-section shall be paid to the victim.
(2) Whoever throws or attempts to throw acid on any person or attempts to administer acid to any
person, or attempts to use any other means, with the intention of causing permanent or partial damage or
deformity or burns or maiming or disfigurement or disability or grievous hurt to that person, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than five years but
which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation 1.—For the purposes of this section, “acid” includes any substance which has acidic or
corrosive character or burning nature, that is capable of causing bodily injury leading to scars or
disfigurement or temporary or permanent disability.
Explanation 2.—For the purposes of this section, permanent or partial damage or deformity or
permanent vegetative state shall not be required to be irreversible.
125. Act endangering life or personal safety of others.—Whoever does any act so rashly or
negligently as to endanger human life or the personal safety of others, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three months or with fine which may
extend to two thousand five hundred rupees, or with both, but—
(a) where hurt is caused, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with
both;
(b) where grievous hurt is caused, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to three years, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with
both.
54
Of wrongful restraint and wrongful confinement
126. Wrongful restraint.—(1) Whoever voluntarily obstructs any person so as to prevent that person
from proceeding in any direction in which that person has a right to proceed, is said wrongfully to restrain
that person.
Exception.—The obstruction of a private way over land or water which a person in good faith
believes himself to have a lawful right to obstruct, is not an offence within the meaning of this section.
Illustration.
A obstructs a path along which Z has a right to pass, A not believing in good faith that he has a right
to stop the path. Z is thereby prevented from passing. A wrongfully restrains Z.
(2) Whoever wrongfully restrains any person shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term
which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
127. Wrongful confinement.—(1) Whoever wrongfully restrains any person in such a manner as to
prevent that person from proceedings beyond certain circumscribing limits, is said “wrongfully to
confine” that person.
Illustrations.
(a) A causes Z to go within a walled space, and locks Z in. Z is thus prevented from proceeding in
any direction beyond the circumscribing line of wall. A wrongfully confines Z.
(b) A places men with firearms at the outlets of a building, and tells Z that they will fire at Z if Z
attempts to leave the building. A wrongfully confines Z.
(2) Whoever wrongfully confines any person shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to five thousand
rupees, or with both.
(3) Whoever wrongfully confines any person for three days, or more, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine which may
extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both.
(4) Whoever wrongfully confines any person for ten days or more, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five years, and shall also be liable to
fine which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees.
(5) Whoever keeps any person in wrongful confinement, knowing that a writ for the liberation of that
person has been duly issued, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to two years in addition to any term of imprisonment to which he may be liable under any
other section of this Chapter and shall also be liable to fine.
(6) Whoever wrongfully confines any person in such manner as to indicate an intention that the
confinement of such person may not be known to any person interested in the person so confined, or to
any public servant, or that the place of such confinement may not be known to or discovered by any such
person or public servant as hereinbefore mentioned, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to three years in addition to any other punishment to which he
may be liable for such wrongful confinement and shall also be liable to fine.
(7) Whoever wrongfully confines any person for the purpose of extorting from the person confined,
or from any person interested in the person confined, any property or valuable security or of constraining
the person confined or any person interested in such person to do anything illegal or to give any
information which may facilitate the commission of an offence, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(8) Whoever wrongfully confines any person for the purpose of extorting from the person confined or
any person interested in the person confined any confession or any information which may lead to the
detection of an offence or misconduct, or for the purpose of constraining the person confined or any
person interested in the person confined to restore or to cause the restoration of any property or valuable
55
security or to satisfy any claim or demand, or to give information which may lead to the restoration of
any property or valuable security, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Of criminal force and assault
128. Force.—A person is said to use force to another if he causes motion, change of motion, or
cessation of motion to that other, or if he causes to any substance such motion, or change of motion, or
cessation of motion as brings that substance into contact with any part of that other’s body, or with
anything which that other is wearing or carrying, or with anything so situated that such contact affects
that other’s sense of feeling:
Provided that the person causing the motion, or change of motion, or cessation of motion, causes that
motion, change of motion, or cessation of motion in one of the following three ways, namely:—
(a) by his own bodily power;
(b) by disposing any substance in such a manner that the motion or change or cessation of motion
takes place without any further act on his part, or on the part of any other person;
(c) by inducing any animal to move, to change its motion, or to cease to move.
129. Criminal force.—Whoever intentionally uses force to any person, without that person’s
consent, in order to the committing of any offence, or intending by the use of such force to cause, or
knowing it to be likely that by the use of such force he will cause injury, fear or annoyance to the person
to whom the force is used, is said to use criminal force to that other.
Illustrations.
(a) Z is sitting in a moored boat on a river. A unfastens the moorings, and thus intentionally causes
the boat to drift down the stream. Here A intentionally causes motion to Z, and he does this by disposing
substances in such a manner that the motion is produced without any other action on any person’s part. A
has therefore intentionally used force to Z; and if he has done so without Z’s consent, in order to the
committing of any offence, or intending or knowing it to be likely that this use of force will cause injury,
fear or annoyance to Z, A has used criminal force to Z.
(b) Z is riding in a chariot. A lashes Z’s horses, and thereby causes them to quicken their pace. Here
A has caused change of motion to Z by inducing the animals to change their motion. A has therefore used
force to Z; and if A has done this without Z’s consent, intending or knowing it to be likely that he may
thereby injure, frighten or annoy Z, A has used criminal force to Z.
(c) Z is riding in a palanquin. A, intending to rob Z, seizes the pole and stops the palanquin. Here A
has caused cessation of motion to Z, and he has done this by his own bodily power. A has therefore used
force to Z; and as A has acted thus intentionally, without Z’s consent, in order to the commission of an
offence. A has used criminal force to Z.
(d) A intentionally pushes against Z in the street. Here A has by his own bodily power moved his
own person so as to bring it into contact with Z. He has therefore intentionally used force to Z; and if he
has done so without Z’s consent, intending or knowing it to be likely that he may thereby injure, frighten
or annoy Z, he has used criminal force to Z.
(e) A throws a stone, intending or knowing it to be likely that the stone will be thus brought into
contact with Z, or with Z’s clothes, or with something carried by Z, or that it will strike water and dash up
the water against Z’s clothes or something carried by Z. Here, if the throwing of the stone produce the
effect of causing any substance to come into contact with Z, or Z’s clothes, A has used force to Z, and if
he did so without Z’s consent, intending thereby to injure, frighten or annoy Z, he has used criminal force
to Z.
(f) A intentionally pulls up a woman’s veil. Here A intentionally uses force to her, and if he does so
without her consent intending or knowing it to be likely that he may thereby injure, frighten or annoy her,
he has used criminal force to her.
56
(g) Z is bathing. A pours into the bath water which he knows to be boiling. Here A intentionally by
his own bodily power causes such motion in the boiling water as brings that water into contact with Z, or
with other water so situated that such contact must affect Z’s sense of feeling; A has therefore
intentionally used force to Z; and if he has done this without Z’s consent intending or knowing it to be
likely that he may thereby cause injury, fear or annoyance to Z, A has used criminal force.
(h) A incites a dog to spring upon Z, without Z’s consent. Here, if A intends to cause injury, fear or
annoyance to Z, he uses criminal force to Z.
130. Assault.—Whoever makes any gesture, or any preparation intending or knowing it to be likely
that such gesture or preparation will cause any person present to apprehend that he who makes that
gesture or preparation is about to use criminal force to that person, is said to commit an assault.
Explanation.—Mere words do not amount to an assault. But the words which a person uses may give
to his gestures or preparation such a meaning as may make those gestures or preparations amount to an
assault.
Illustrations.
(a) A shakes his fist at Z, intending or knowing it to be likely that he may thereby cause Z to believe
that A is about to strike Z. A has committed an assault.
(b) A begins to unloose the muzzle of a ferocious dog, intending or knowing it to be likely that he may
thereby cause Z to believe that he is about to cause the dog to attack Z. A has committed an assault upon
Z.
(c) A takes up a stick, saying to Z, “I will give you a beating”. Here, though the words used by A
could in no case amount to an assault, and though the mere gesture, unaccompanied by any other
circumstances, might not amount to an assault, the gesture explained by the words may amount to an
assault.
131. Punishment for assault or criminal force otherwise than on grave provocation.—Whoever
assaults or uses criminal force to any person otherwise than on grave and sudden provocation given by
that person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
three months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
Explanation 1.—Grave and sudden provocation will not mitigate the punishment for an offence under
this section,—
(a) if the provocation is sought or voluntarily provoked by the offender as an excuse for the
offence; or
(b) if the provocation is given by anything done in obedience to the law, or by a public servant, in
the lawful exercise of the powers of such public servant; or
(c) if the provocation is given by anything done in the lawful exercise of the right of private
defence.
Explanation 2.—Whether the provocation was grave and sudden enough to mitigate the offence, is a
question of fact.
132. Assault or criminal force to deter public servant from discharge of his duty.—Whoever
assaults or uses criminal force to any person being a public servant in the execution of his duty as such
public servant, or with intent to prevent or deter that person from discharging his duty as such public
servant, or in consequence of anything done or attempted to be done by such person in the lawful
discharge of his duty as such public servant, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
133. Assault or criminal force with intent to dishonour person, otherwise than on grave
provocation.—Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any person, intending thereby to dishonour
that person, otherwise than on grave and sudden provocation given by that person, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
57
134. Assault or criminal force in attempt to commit theft of property carried by a person.—
Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any person, in attempting to commit theft on any property
which that person is then wearing or carrying, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
135. Assault or criminal force in attempt to wrongfully confine a person.—Whoever assaults or
uses criminal force to any person, in attempting wrongfully to confine that person, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may
extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
136. Assault or criminal force on grave provocation.—Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to
any person on grave and sudden provocation given by that person, shall be punished with simple
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to one thousand
rupees, or with both.
Explanation.—This section is subject to the same Explanation as section 131.
Of kidnapping, abduction, slavery and forced labour
137. Kidnapping.—(1) Kidnapping is of two kinds: kidnapping from India, and kidnapping from
lawful guardianship—
(a) whoever conveys any person beyond the limits of India without the consent of that person, or
of some person legally authorised to consent on behalf of that person, is said to kidnap that person
from India;
(b) whoever takes or entices any child or any person of unsound mind, out of the keeping of the
lawful guardian of such child or person of unsound mind, without the consent of such guardian, is
said to kidnap such child or person from lawful guardianship.
Explanation.—The words “lawful guardian” in this clause include any person lawfully entrusted
with the care or custody of such child or other person.
Exception.—This clause does not extend to the act of any person who in good faith believes
himself to be the father of an illegitimate child, or who in good faith believes himself to be entitled to
the lawful custody of such child, unless such act is committed for an immoral or unlawful purpose.
(2) Whoever kidnaps any person from India or from lawful guardianship shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to
fine.
138. Abduction.—Whoever by force compels, or by any deceitful means induces, any person to go
from any place, is said to abduct that person.
139. Kidnapping or maiming a child for purposes of begging.—(1) Whoever kidnaps any child or,
not being the lawful guardian of such child, obtains the custody of the child, in order that such child may
be employed or used for the purposes of begging shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a
term which shall not be less than ten years but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also
be liable to fine.
(2) Whoever maims any child in order that such child may be employed or used for the purposes of
begging shall be punishable with imprisonment which shall not be less than twenty years, but which may
extend to life which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that person’s natural life, and with
fine.
(3) Where any person, not being the lawful guardian of a child employs or uses such child for the
purposes of begging, it shall be presumed, unless the contrary is proved, that he kidnapped or otherwise
obtained the custody of such child in order that such child might be employed or used for the purposes of
begging.
(4) In this section “begging” means—
58
(i) soliciting or receiving alms in a public place, whether under the pretence of singing, dancing,
fortune telling, performing tricks or selling articles or otherwise;
(ii) entering on any private premises for the purpose of soliciting or receiving alms;
(iii) exposing or exhibiting, with the object of obtaining or extorting alms, any sore, wound,
injury, deformity or disease, whether of himself or of any other person or of an animal;
(iv) using such child as an exhibit for the purpose of soliciting or receiving alms.
140. Kidnapping or abducting in order to murder or for ransom, etc.—(1) Whoever kidnaps or
abducts any person in order that such person may be murdered or may be so disposed of as to be put in
danger of being murdered, shall be punished with imprisonment for life or rigorous imprisonment for a
term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Illustrations.
(a) A kidnaps Z from India, intending or knowing it to be likely that Z may be sacrificed to an idol. A
has committed the offence defined in this section.
(b) A forcibly carries or entices B away from his home in order that B may be murdered. A has
committed the offence defined in this section.
(2) Whoever kidnaps or abducts any person or keeps a person in detention after such kidnapping or
abduction, and threatens to cause death or hurt to such person, or by his conduct gives rise to a reasonable
apprehension that such person may be put to death or hurt, or causes hurt or death to such person in order
to compel the Government or any foreign State or international inter-governmental organisation or any
other person to do or abstain from doing any act or to pay a ransom, shall be punishable with death, or
imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.
(3) Whoever kidnaps or abducts any person with intent to cause that person to be secretly and
wrongfully confined, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(4) Whoever kidnaps or abducts any person in order that such person may be subjected, or may be so
disposed of as to be put in danger of being subjected to grievous hurt, or slavery, or to the unnatural lust
of any person, or knowing it to be likely that such person will be so subjected or disposed of, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also
be liable to fine.
141. Importation of girl or boy from foreign country.—Whoever imports into India from any
country outside India any girl under the age of twenty-one years or any boy under the age of eighteen
years with intent that girl or boy may be, or knowing it to be likely that girl or boy will be, forced or
seduced to illicit intercourse with another person, shall be punishable with imprisonment which may
extend to ten years and shall also be liable to fine.
142. Wrongfully concealing or keeping in confinement, kidnapped or abducted person.—
Whoever, knowing that any person has been kidnapped or has been abducted, wrongfully conceals or
confines such person, shall be punished in the same manner as if he had kidnapped or abducted such
person with the same intention or knowledge, or for the same purpose as that with or for which he
conceals or detains such person in confinement.
143. Trafficking of person.—(1) Whoever, for the purpose of exploitation recruits, transports,
harbours, transfers, or receives a person or persons, by—
(a) using threats; or
(b) using force, or any other form of coercion; or
(c) by abduction; or
(d) by practising fraud, or deception; or
(e) by abuse of power; or
59
(f) by inducement, including the giving or receiving of payments or benefits, in order to achieve
the consent of any person having control over the person recruited, transported, harboured,
transferred or received,
commits the offence of trafficking.
Explanation 1.—The expression “exploitation” shall include any act of physical exploitation or
any form of sexual exploitation, slavery or practices similar to slavery, servitude, beggary or forced
removal of organs.
Explanation 2.—The consent of the victim is immaterial in determination of the offence of
trafficking.
(2) Whoever commits the offence of trafficking shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a
term which shall not be less than seven years, but which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable
to fine.
(3) Where the offence involves the trafficking of more than one person, it shall be punishable with
rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten years but which may extend to
imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.
(4) Where the offence involves the trafficking of a child, it shall be punishable with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten years, but which may extend to imprisonment
for life, and shall also be liable to fine.
(5) Where the offence involves the trafficking of more than one child, it shall be punishable with
rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than fourteen years, but which may extend to
imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.
(6) If a person is convicted of the offence of trafficking of a child on more than one occasion, then
such person shall be punished with imprisonment for life, which shall mean imprisonment for the
remainder of that person’s natural life, and shall also be liable to fine.
(7) When a public servant or a police officer is involved in the trafficking of any person then, such
public servant or police officer shall be punished with imprisonment for life, which shall mean
imprisonment for the remainder of that person’s natural life, and shall also be liable to fine.
144. Exploitation of a trafficked person.—(1) Whoever, knowingly or having reason to believe that
a child has been trafficked, engages such child for sexual exploitation in any manner, shall be punished
with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years, but which may extend to
ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(2) Whoever, knowingly or having reason to believe that a person has been trafficked, engages such
person for sexual exploitation in any manner, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term
which shall not be less than three years, but which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to
fine.
145. Habitual dealing in slaves.—Whoever habitually imports, exports, removes, buys, sells, traffics
or deals in slaves, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either
description for a term not exceeding ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
146. Unlawful compulsory labour.—Whoever unlawfully compels any person to labour against the
will of that person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.
CHAPTER VII
OF OFFENCES AGAINST THE STATE
147. Waging, or attempting to wage war, or abetting waging of war, against Government of
India.—Whoever wages war against the Government of India, or attempts to wage such war, or abets the
waging of such war, shall be punished with death, or imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine.
60
Illustration.
A joins an insurrection against the Government of India. A has committed the offence defined in this
section.
148. Conspiracy to commit offences punishable by section 147.—Whoever within or without and
beyond India conspires to commit any of the offences punishable by section 147, or conspires to
overawe, by means of criminal force or the show of criminal force, the Central Government or any State
Government, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either description
which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation.—To constitute a conspiracy under this section, it is not necessary that any act or illegal
omission shall take place in pursuance thereof.
149. Collecting arms, etc., with intention of waging war against Government of India.—
Whoever collects men, arms or ammunition or otherwise prepares to wage war with the intention of
either waging or being prepared to wage war against the Government of India, shall be punished with
imprisonment for life or imprisonment of either description for a term not exceeding ten years, and shall
also be liable to fine.
150. Concealing with intent to facilitate design to wage war.—Whoever by any act, or by any
illegal omission, conceals the existence of a design to wage war against the Government of India,
intending by such concealment to facilitate, or knowing it to be likely that such concealment will
facilitate, the waging of such war, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
151. Assaulting President, Governor, etc., with intent to compel or restrain exercise of any
lawful power.—Whoever, with the intention of inducing or compelling the President of India, or
Governor of any State, to exercise or refrain from exercising in any manner any of the lawful powers of
such President or Governor, assaults or wrongfully restrains, or attempts wrongfully to restrain, or
overawes, by means of criminal force or the show of criminal force, or attempts so to overawe, such
President or Governor, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
152. Act endangering sovereignty, unity and integrity of India.—Whoever, purposely or
knowingly, by words, either spoken or written, or by signs, or by visible representation, or by electronic
communication or by use of financial mean, or otherwise, excites or attempts to excite, secession or
armed rebellion or subversive activities, or encourages feelings of separatist activities or endangers
sovereignty or unity and integrity of India; or indulges in or commits any such act shall be punished with
imprisonment for life or with imprisonment which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to
fine.
Explanation.—Comments expressing disapprobation of the measures, or administrative or other
action of the Government with a view to obtain their alteration by lawful means without exciting or
attempting to excite the activities referred to in this section do not constitute an offence under this
section.
153. Waging war against Government of any foreign State at peace with Government of
India.—Whoever wages war against the Government of any foreign State at peace with the Government
of India or attempts to wage such war, or abets the waging of such war, shall be punished with
imprisonment for life, to which fine may be added, or with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to seven years, to which fine may be added, or with fine.
154. Committing depredation on territories of foreign State at peace with Government of
India.—Whoever commits depredation, or makes preparations to commit depredation, on the territories
of any foreign State at peace with the Government of India, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine and to
forfeiture of any property used or intended to be used in committing such depredation, or acquired by
such depredation.
61
155. Receiving property taken by war or depredation mentioned in sections 153 and 154.—
Whoever receives any property knowing the same to have been taken in the commission of any of the
offences mentioned in sections 153 and 154, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine and to forfeiture of the
property so received.
156. Public servant voluntarily allowing prisoner of State or war to escape.—Whoever, being a
public servant and having the custody of any State prisoner or prisoner of war, voluntarily allows such
prisoner to escape from any place in which such prisoner is confined, shall be punished with
imprisonment for life, or imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years,
and shall also be liable to fine.
157. Public servant negligently suffering such prisoner to escape.—Whoever, being a public
servant and having the custody of any State prisoner or prisoner of war, negligently suffers such prisoner
to escape from any place of confinement in which such prisoner is confined, shall be punished with
simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine.
158. Aiding escape of, rescuing or harbouring such prisoner.—Whoever knowingly aids or assists
any State prisoner or prisoner of war in escaping from lawful custody, or rescues or attempts to rescue
any such prisoner, or harbours or conceals any such prisoner who has escaped from lawful custody, or
offers or attempts to offer any resistance to the recapture of such prisoner, shall be punished with
imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten
years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation.—A State prisoner or prisoner of war, who is permitted to be at large on his parole
within certain limits in India, is said to escape from lawful custody if he goes beyond the limits
within which he is allowed to be at large.
CHAPTER VIII
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO THE ARMY, NAVY AND AIR FORCE
159. Abetting mutiny, or attempting to seduce a soldier, sailor or airman from his duty.—
Whoever abets the committing of mutiny by an officer, soldier, sailor or airman, in the Army, Navy or
Air Force of the Government of India or attempts to seduce any such officer, soldier, sailor or airman
from his allegiance or his duty, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
160. Abetment of mutiny, if mutiny is committed in consequence thereof.—Whoever abets the
committing of mutiny by an officer, soldier, sailor or airman, in the Army, Navy or Air Force of the
Government of India, shall, if mutiny be committed in consequence of that abetment, be punished with
death or with imprisonment for life, or imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
161. Abetment of assault by soldier, sailor or airman on his superior officer, when in execution
of his office.—Whoever abets an assault by an officer, soldier, sailor or airman, in the Army, Navy or Air
Force of the Government of India, on any superior officer being in the execution of his office, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall
also be liable to fine.
162. Abetment of such assault, if assault committed.—Whoever abets an assault by an officer,
soldier, sailor or airman, in the Army, Navy or Air Force of the Government of India, on any superior
officer being in the execution of his office, shall, if such assault be committed in consequence of that
abetment be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven
years, and shall also be liable to fine.
163. Abetment of desertion of soldier, sailor or airman.—Whoever abets the desertion of any
officer, soldier, sailor or airman, in the Army, Navy or Air Force of the Government of India, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine,
or with both.
62
164. Harbouring deserter.—Whoever, except as hereinafter excepted, knowing or having reason to
believe that an officer, soldier, sailor or airman, in the Army, Navy or Air Force of the Government of
India, has deserted, harbours such officer, soldier, sailor or airman, shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine or with both.
Exception.—This provision does not extend to the case in which the harbour is given by the spouse of
the deserter.
165. Deserter concealed on board merchant vessel through negligence of master.—The master or
person in charge of a merchant vessel, on board of which any deserter from the Army, Navy or Air Force
of the Government of India is concealed, shall, though ignorant of such concealment, be liable to a
penalty not exceeding three thousand rupees, if he might have known of such concealment but for some
neglect of his duty as such master or person in charge, or but for some want of discipline on board of the
vessel.
166. Abetment of act of insubordination by soldier, sailor or airman.—Whoever abets what he
knows to be an act of insubordination by an officer, soldier, sailor or airman, in the Army, Navy or Air
Force, of the Government of India, shall, if such act of insubordination be committed in consequence of
that abetment, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two
years, or with fine, or with both.
167. Persons subject to certain Acts.—No person subject to the Air Force Act, 1950 (45 of 1950),
the Army Act, 1950 (46 of 1950) and the Navy Act, 1957 (62 of 1957), or shall be subject to punishment
under this Sanhita for any of the offences defined in this Chapter.
168. Wearing garb or carrying token used by soldier, sailor or airman.—Whoever, not being a
soldier, sailor or airman in the Army, Naval or Air service of the Government of India, wears any garb or
carries any token resembling any garb or token used by such a soldier, sailor or airman with the intention
that it may be believed that he is such a soldier, sailor or airman, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to two
thousand rupees, or with both.
CHAPTER IX
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO ELECTIONS
169. Candidate, electoral right defined.—For the purposes of this Chapter—
(a) “candidate” means a person who has been nominated as a candidate at any election;
(b) “electoral right” means the right of a person to stand, or not to stand as, or to withdraw from
being, a candidate or to vote or refrain from voting at an election.
170. Bribery.—(1) Whoever—
(i) gives a gratification to any person with the object of inducing him or any other person to
exercise any electoral right or of rewarding any person for having exercised any such right; or
(ii) accepts either for himself or for any other person any gratification as a reward for exercising
any such right or for inducing or attempting to induce any other person to exercise any such right,
commits the offence of bribery:
Provided that a declaration of public policy or a promise of public action shall not be an offence
under this section.
(2) A person who offers, or agrees to give, or offers or attempts to procure, a gratification shall be
deemed to give a gratification.
(3) A person who obtains or agrees to accept or attempts to obtain a gratification shall be deemed to
accept a gratification, and a person who accepts a gratification as a motive for doing what he does not
intend to do, or as a reward for doing what he has not done, shall be deemed to have accepted the
gratification as a reward.
63
171. Undue influence at elections.—(1) Whoever voluntarily interferes or attempts to interfere with
the free exercise of any electoral right commits the offence of undue influence at an election.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (1), whoever—
(a) threatens any candidate or voter, or any person in whom a candidate or voter is interested,
with injury of any kind; or
(b) induces or attempts to induce a candidate or voter to believe that he or any person in whom he
is interested will become or will be rendered an object of Divine displeasure or of spiritual censure,
shall be deemed to interfere with the free exercise of the electoral right of such candidate or voter, within
the meaning of sub-section (1).
(3) A declaration of public policy or a promise of public action or the mere exercise or a legal right
without intent to interfere with an electoral right, shall not be deemed to be interference within the
meaning of this section.
172. Personation at elections.—Whoever at an election applies for a voting paper on votes in the
name of any other person, whether living or dead, or in a fictitious name, or who having voted once at
such election applies at the same election for a voting paper in his own name, and whoever abets,
procures or attempts to procure the voting by any person in any such way, commits the offence of
personation at an election:
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to a person who has been authorised to vote as proxy
for an elector under any law for the time being in force in so far as he votes as a proxy for such elector.
173. Punishment for bribery.—Whoever commits the offence of bribery shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both:
Provided that bribery by treating shall be punished with fine only.
Explanation.—“Treating” means that form of bribery where the gratification consists in food, drink,
entertainment, or provision.
174. Punishment for undue influence or personation at an election.—Whoever commits the
offence of undue influence or personation at an election shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to one year or with fine, or with both.
175. False statement in connection with an election.—Whoever with intent to affect the result of
an election makes or publishes any statement purporting to be a statement of fact which is false and
which he either knows or believes to be false or does not believe to be true, in relation to the personal
character or conduct of any candidate shall be punished with fine.
176. Illegal payments in connection with an election.—Whoever without the general or special
authority in writing of a candidate incurs or authorises expenses on account of the holding of any public
meeting, or upon any advertisement, circular or publication, or in any other way whatsoever for the
purpose of promoting or procuring the election of such candidate, shall be punished with fine which may
extend to ten thousand rupees:
Provided that if any person having incurred any such expenses not exceeding the amount of ten
rupees without authority obtains within ten days from the date on which such expenses were incurred the
approval in writing of the candidate, he shall be deemed to have incurred such expenses with the
authority of the candidate.
177. Failure to keep election accounts.—Whoever being required by any law for the time being in
force or any rule having the force of law to keep accounts of expenses incurred at or in connection with
an election fails to keep such accounts shall be punished with fine which may extend to five thousand
rupees.
64
CHAPTER X
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO COIN, CURRENCY-NOTES, BANK-NOTES, AND GOVERNMENT STAMPS
178. Counterfeiting coin, Government stamps, currency-notes or bank-notes.—Whoever
counterfeits, or knowingly performs any part of the process of counterfeiting, any coin, stamp issued by
Government for the purpose of revenue, currency-note or bank-note, shall be punished with
imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten
years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this Chapter,—
(1) the expression “bank-note” means a promissory note or engagement for the payment of
money to bearer on demand issued by any person carrying on the business of banking in any part of
the world, or issued by or under the authority of any State or Sovereign Power, and intended to be
used as equivalent to, or as a substitute for money;
(2) “coin” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in section 2 of the Coinage Act, 2011
(11 of 2011) and includes metal used for the time being as money and is stamped and issued by or
under the authority of any State or Sovereign Power intended to be so used;
(3) a person commits the offence of “counterfeiting Government stamp” who counterfeits by
causing a genuine stamp of one denomination to appear like a genuine stamp of a different
denomination;
(4) a person commits the offence of counterfeiting coin who intending to practise deception, or
knowing it to be likely that deception will thereby be practised, causes a genuine coin to appear like a
different coin; and
(5) the offence of “counterfeiting coin” includes diminishing the weight or alteration of the
composition, or alteration of the appearance of the coin.
179. Using as genuine, forged or counterfeit coin, Government stamp, currency-notes or banknotes.—Whoever imports or exports, or sells or delivers to, or buys or receives from, any other person, or
otherwise traffics or uses as genuine, any forged or counterfeit coin, stamp, currency-note or bank-note,
knowing or having reason to believe the same to be forged or counterfeit, shall be punished with
imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten
years, and shall also be liable to fine.
180. Possession of forged or counterfeit coin, Government stamp, currency-notes or banknotes.—Whoever has in his possession any forged or counterfeit coin, stamp, currency-note or bank-note,
knowing or having reason to believe the same to be forged or counterfeit and intending to use the same as
genuine or that it may be used as genuine, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both.
Explanation.—If a person establishes the possession of the forged or counterfeit coin, stamp,
currency-note or bank-note to be from a lawful source, it shall not constitute an offence under this
section.
181. Making or possessing instruments or materials for forging or counterfeiting coin,
Government stamp, currency-notes or bank-notes.—Whoever makes or mends, or performs any part
of the process of making or mending, or buys or sells or disposes of, or has in his possession, any
machinery, die, or instrument or material for the purpose of being used, or knowing or having reason to
believe that it is intended to be used, for forging or counterfeiting any coin, stamp issued by Government
for the purpose of revenue, currency-note or bank-note, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable
to fine.
182. Making or using documents resembling currency-notes or bank-notes.—(1) Whoever
makes, or causes to be made, or uses for any purpose whatsoever, or delivers to any person, any
document purporting to be, or in any way resembling, or so nearly resembling as to be calculated to
65
deceive, any currency-note or bank-note shall be punished with fine which may extend to three hundred
rupees.
(2) If any person, whose name appears on a document the making of which is an offence under
sub-section (1), refuses, without lawful excuse, to disclose to a police officer on being so required the
name and address of the person by whom it was printed or otherwise made, he shall be punished with fine
which may extend to six hundred rupees.
(3) Where the name of any person appears on any document in respect of which any person is
charged with an offence under sub-section (1) or on any other document used or distributed in connection
with that document it may, until the contrary is proved, be presumed that the person caused the document
to be made.
183. Effacing writing from substance bearing Government stamp, or removing from document
a stamp used for it, with intent to cause loss to Government.—Whoever, fraudulently or with intent to
cause loss to the Government, removes or effaces from any substance, bearing any stamp issued by
Government for the purpose of revenue, any writing or document for which such stamp has been used, or
removes from any writing or document a stamp which has been used for such writing or document, in
order that such stamp may be used for a different writing or document, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
184. Using Government stamp known to have been before used.—Whoever, fraudulently or with
intent to cause loss to the Government, uses for any purpose a stamp issued by Government for the
purpose of revenue, which he knows to have been before used, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
185. Erasure of mark denoting that stamp has been used.—Whoever, fraudulently or with intent
to cause loss to Government, erases or removes from a stamp issued by Government for the purpose of
revenue, any mark, put or impressed upon such stamp for the purpose of denoting that the same has been
used, or knowingly has in his possession or sells or disposes of any such stamp from which such mark
has been erased or removed, or sells or disposes of any such stamp which he knows to have been used,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or
with fine, or with both.
186. Prohibition of fictitious stamps.—(1) Whoever—
(a) makes, knowingly utters, deals in or sells any fictitious stamp, or knowingly uses for any
postal purpose any fictitious stamp; or
(b) has in his possession, without lawful excuse, any fictitious stamp; or
(c) makes or, without lawful excuse, has in his possession any die, plate, instrument or materials
for making any fictitious stamp,
shall be punished with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees.
(2) Any such stamp, die, plate, instrument or materials in the possession of any person for making
any fictitious stamp may be seized and, if seized shall be forfeited.
(3) In this section “fictitious stamp” means any stamp falsely purporting to be issued by Government
for the purpose of denoting a rate of postage, or any facsimile or imitation or representation, whether on
paper or otherwise, of any stamp issued by Government for that purpose.
(4) In this section and also in sections 178 to 181 (both inclusive), and sections 183 to 185 (both
inclusive) the word “Government”, when used in connection with, or in reference to any stamp issued for
the purpose of denoting a rate of postage, shall, notwithstanding anything in clause (12) of section 2, be
deemed to include the person or persons authorised by law to administer executive Government in any
part of India or in any foreign country.
187. Person employed in mint causing coin to be of different weight or composition from that
fixed by law.—Whoever, being employed in any mint lawfully established in India, does any act, or
omits what he is legally bound to do, with the intention of causing any coin issued from that mint to be of
66
a different weight or composition from the weight or composition fixed by law, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to
fine.
188. Unlawfully taking coining instrument from mint.—Whoever, without lawful authority, takes
out of any mint, lawfully established in India, any coining tool or instrument, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to
fine.
CHAPTER XI
OF OFFENCES AGAINST THE PUBLIC TRANQUILLITY
189. Unlawful assembly.—(1) An assembly of five or more persons is designated an “unlawful
assembly”, if the common object of the persons composing that assembly is—
(a) to overawe by criminal force, or show of criminal force, the Central Government or any State
Government or Parliament or the Legislature of any State, or any public servant in the exercise of the
lawful power of such public servant; or
(b) to resist the execution of any law, or of any legal process; or
(c) to commit any mischief or criminal trespass, or other offence; or
(d) by means of criminal force, or show of criminal force, to any person, to take or obtain
possession of any property, or to deprive any person of the enjoyment of a right of way, or of the use
of water or other incorporeal right of which he is in possession or enjoyment, or to enforce any right
or supposed right; or
(e) by means of criminal force, or show of criminal force, to compel any person to do what he is
not legally bound to do, or to omit to do what he is legally entitled to do.
Explanation.—An assembly which was not unlawful when it assembled, may subsequently become
an unlawful assembly.
(2) Whoever, being aware of facts which render any assembly an unlawful assembly, intentionally
joins that assembly, or continues in it, is said to be a member of an unlawful assembly and such member
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or
with fine, or with both.
(3) Whoever joins or continues in an unlawful assembly, knowing that such unlawful assembly has
been commanded in the manner prescribed by law to disperse, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
(4) Whoever, being armed with any deadly weapon, or with anything which, used as a weapon of
offence, is likely to cause death, is a member of an unlawful assembly, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
(5) Whoever knowingly joins or continues in any assembly of five or more persons likely to cause a
disturbance of the public peace, after such assembly has been lawfully commanded to disperse, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with
fine, or with both.
Explanation.—If the assembly is an unlawful assembly within the meaning of sub-section (1), the
offender shall be punishable under sub-section (3).
(6) Whoever hires or engages, or employs, or promotes, or connives at the hiring, engagement or
employment of any person to join or become a member of any unlawful assembly, shall be punishable as
a member of such unlawful assembly, and for any offence which may be committed by any such person
as a member of such unlawful assembly in pursuance of such hiring, engagement or employment, in the
same manner as if he had been a member of such unlawful assembly, or himself had committed such
offence.
67
(7) Whoever harbours, receives or assembles, in any house or premises in his occupation or charge,
or under his control any persons knowing that such persons have been hired, engaged or employed, or are
about to be hired, engaged or employed, to join or become members of an unlawful assembly, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with
fine, or with both.
(8) Whoever is engaged, or hired, or offers or attempts to be hired or engaged, to do or assist in doing
any of the acts specified in sub-section (1), shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.
(9) Whoever, being so engaged or hired as referred to in sub-section (8), goes armed, or engages or
offers to go armed, with any deadly weapon or with anything which used as a weapon of offence is likely
to cause death, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
two years, or with fine, or with both.
190. Every member of unlawful assembly guilty of offence committed in prosecution of
common object.—If an offence is committed by any member of an unlawful assembly in prosecution of
the common object of that assembly, or such as the members of that assembly knew to be likely to be
committed in prosecution of that object, every person who, at the time of the committing of that offence,
is a member of the same assembly, is guilty of that offence.
191. Rioting.—(1) Whenever force or violence is used by an unlawful assembly, or by any member
thereof, in prosecution of the common object of such assembly, every member of such assembly is guilty
of the offence of rioting.
(2) Whoever is guilty of rioting, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
(3) Whoever is guilty of rioting, being armed with a deadly weapon or with anything which, used as a
weapon of offence, is likely to cause death, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to five years, or with fine, or with both.
192. Wantonly giving provocation with intent to cause riot-if rioting be committed; if not
committed.—Whoever malignantly, or wantonly by doing anything which is illegal, gives provocation to
any person intending or knowing it to be likely that such provocation will cause the offence of rioting to
be committed, shall, if the offence of rioting be committed in consequence of such provocation, be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine,
or with both; and if the offence of rioting be not committed, with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.
193. Liability of owner, occupier, etc., of land on which an unlawful assembly or riot takes
place.—(1) Whenever any unlawful assembly or riot takes place, the owner or occupier of the land upon
which such unlawful assembly is held, or such riot is committed, and any person having or claiming an
interest in such land, shall be punishable with fine not exceeding one thousand rupees, if he or his agent
or manager, knowing that such offence is being or has been committed, or having reason to believe it is
likely to be committed, do not give the earliest notice thereof in his or their power to the officer in charge
at the nearest police station, and do not, in the case of his or their having reason to believe that it was
about to be committed, use all lawful means in his or their power to prevent it and, in the event of its
taking place, do not use all lawful means in his or their power to disperse or suppress the riot or unlawful
assembly.
(2) Whenever a riot is committed for the benefit or on behalf of any person who is the owner or
occupier of any land respecting which such riot takes place or who claims any interest in such land, or in
the subject of any dispute which gave rise to the riot, or who has accepted or derived any benefit
therefrom, such person shall be punishable with fine, if he or his agent or manager, having reason to
believe that such riot was likely to be committed or that the unlawful assembly by which such riot was
committed was likely to be held, shall not respectively use all lawful means in his or their power to
prevent such assembly or riot from taking place, and for suppressing and dispersing the same.
68
(3) Whenever a riot is committed for the benefit or on behalf of any person who is the owner or
occupier of any land respecting which such riot takes place, or who claims any interest in such land, or in
the subject of any dispute which gave rise to the riot, or who has accepted or derived any benefit
therefrom, the agent or manager of such person shall be punishable with fine, if such agent or manager,
having reason to believe that such riot was likely to be committed, or that the unlawful assembly by
which such riot was committed was likely to be held, shall not use all lawful means in his power to
prevent such riot or assembly from taking place and for suppressing and dispersing the same.
194. Affray.—(1) When two or more persons, by fighting in a public place, disturb the public peace,
they are said to commit an affray.
(2) Whoever commits an affray, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
195. Assaulting or obstructing public servant when suppressing riot, etc.—(1) Whoever assaults
or obstructs any public servant or uses criminal force on any public servant in the discharge of his duty as
such public servant in endeavouring to disperse an unlawful assembly, or to suppress a riot or affray,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or
with fine which shall not be less than twenty-five thousand rupees, or with both.
(2) Whoever threatens to assault or attempts to obstruct any public servant or threatens or attempts to
use criminal force to any public servant in the discharge of his duty as such public servant in
endeavouring to disperse an unlawful assembly, or to suppress a riot or affray, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.
196. Promoting enmity between different groups on grounds of religion, race, place of birth,
residence, language, etc., and doing acts prejudicial to maintenance of harmony.—(1) Whoever—
(a) by words, either spoken or written, or by signs or by visible representations or through
electronic communication or otherwise, promotes or attempts to promote, on grounds of religion,
race, place of birth, residence, language, caste or community or any other ground whatsoever,
disharmony or feelings of enmity, hatred or ill-will between different religious, racial, language or
regional groups or castes or communities; or
(b) commits any act which is prejudicial to the maintenance of harmony between different
religious, racial, language or regional groups or castes or communities, and which disturbs or is likely
to disturb the public tranquillity; or
(c) organises any exercise, movement, drill or other similar activity intending that the participants
in such activity shall use or be trained to use criminal force or violence or knowing it to be likely that
the participants in such activity will use or be trained to use criminal force or violence, or participates
in such activity intending to use or be trained to use criminal force or violence or knowing it to be
likely that the participants in such activity will use or be trained to use criminal force or violence,
against any religious, racial, language or regional group or caste or community and such activity for
any reason whatsoever causes or is likely to cause fear or alarm or a feeling of insecurity amongst
members of such religious, racial, language or regional group or caste or community,
shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
(2) Whoever commits an offence specified in sub-section (1) in any place of worship or in any
assembly engaged in the performance of religious worship or religious ceremonies, shall be punished
with imprisonment which may extend to five years and shall also be liable to fine.
197. Imputations, assertions prejudicial to national integration.—(1) Whoever, by words either
spoken or written or by signs or by visible representations or through electronic communication or
otherwise,—
(a) makes or publishes any imputation that any class of persons cannot, by reason of their being
members of any religious, racial, language or regional group or caste or community, bear true faith
and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established or uphold the sovereignty and
integrity of India; or
69
(b) asserts, counsels, advises, propagates or publishes that any class of persons shall, by reason of
their being members of any religious, racial, language or regional group or caste or community, be
denied, or deprived of their rights as citizens of India; or
(c) makes or publishes any assertion, counsel, plea or appeal concerning the obligation of any
class of persons, by reason of their being members of any religious, racial, language or regional
group or caste or community, and such assertion, counsel, plea or appeal causes or is likely to cause
disharmony or feelings of enmity or hatred or ill-will between such members and other persons; or
(d) makes or publishes false or misleading information, jeopardising the sovereignty, unity and
integrity or security of India,
shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
(2) Whoever commits an offence specified in sub-section (1) in any place of worship or in any
assembly engaged in the performance of religious worship or religious ceremonies, shall be punished
with imprisonment which may extend to five years and shall also be liable to fine.
CHAPTER XII
OF OFFENCES BY OR RELATING TO PUBLIC SERVANTS
198. Public servant disobeying law, with intent to cause injury to any person.—Whoever, being a
public servant, knowingly disobeys any direction of the law as to the way in which he is to conduct
himself as such public servant, intending to cause, or knowing it to be likely that he will by such
disobedience, cause injury to any person, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which
may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.
Illustration.
A, being an officer directed by law to take property in execution, in order to satisfy a decree
pronounced in Z’s favour by a Court, knowingly disobeys that direction of law, with the knowledge that
he is likely thereby to cause injury to Z. A has committed the offence defined in this section.
199. Public servant disobeying direction under law.—Whoever, being a public servant,—
(a) knowingly disobeys any direction of the law which prohibits him from requiring the
attendance at any place of any person for the purpose of investigation into an offence or any other
matter; or
(b) knowingly disobeys, to the prejudice of any person, any other direction of the law regulating
the manner in which he shall conduct such investigation; or
(c) fails to record any information given to him under sub-section (1) of section 173 of the
Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 in relation to cognizable offence punishable under
section 64, section 65, section 66, section 67, section 68, section 70, section 71, section 74,
section 76, section 77, section 79, section 124, section 143 or section 144,
shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months but
which may extend to two years, and shall also be liable to fine.
200. Punishment for non-treatment of victim.—Whoever, being in charge of a hospital, public or
private, whether run by the Central Government, the State Government, local bodies or any other person,
contravenes the provisions of section 397 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, shall be
punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.
201. Public servant framing an incorrect document with intent to cause injury.—Whoever,
being a public servant, and being, as such public servant, charged with the preparation or translation of
any document or electronic record, frames, prepares or translates that document or electronic record in a
manner which he knows or believes to be incorrect, intending thereby to cause or knowing it to be likely
that he may thereby cause injury to any person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
70
202. Public servant unlawfully engaging in trade.—Whoever, being a public servant, and being
legally bound as such public servant not to engage in trade, engages in trade, shall be punished with
simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both or with
community service.
203. Public servant unlawfully buying or bidding for property.—Whoever, being a public
servant, and being legally bound as such public servant, not to purchase or bid for certain property,
purchases or bids for that property, either in his own name or in the name of another, or jointly, or in
shares with others, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to two
years, or with fine, or with both; and the property, if purchased, shall be confiscated.
204. Personating a public servant.—Whoever pretends to hold any particular office as a public
servant, knowing that he does not hold such office or falsely personates any other person holding such
office, and in such assumed character does or attempts to do any act under colour of such office, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than six months but
which may extend to three years and with fine.
205. Wearing garb or carrying token used by public servant with fraudulent intent.—Whoever,
not belonging to a certain class of public servants, wears any garb or carries any token resembling any
garb or token used by that class of public servants, with the intention that it may be believed, or with the
knowledge that it is likely to be believed, that he belongs to that class of public servants, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three months, or with
fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
CHAPTER XIII
OF CONTEMPTS OF THE LAWFUL AUTHORITY OF PUBLIC SERVANTS
206. Absconding to avoid service of summons or other proceeding.—Whoever absconds in order
to avoid being served with a summons, notice or order proceeding from any public servant legally
competent, as such public servant, to issue such summons, notice or order,—
(a) shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or
with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both;
(b) where such summons or notice or order is to attend in person or by agent, or to produce a
document or an electronic record in a Court shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term
which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both.
207. Preventing service of summons or other proceeding, or preventing publication thereof.—
Whoever in any manner intentionally prevents the serving on himself, or on any other person, of any
summons, notice or order proceeding from any public servant legally competent, as such public servant,
to issue such summons, notice or order, or intentionally prevents the lawful affixing to any place of any
such summons, notice or order or intentionally removes any such summons, notice or order from any
place to which it is lawfully affixed or intentionally prevents the lawful making of any proclamation,
under the authority of any public servant legally competent, as such public servant, to direct such
proclamation to be made,—
(a) shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or
with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both;
(b) where the summons, notice, order or proclamation is to attend in person or by agent, or to
produce a document or electronic record in a Court, with simple imprisonment for a term which may
extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both.
208. Non-attendance in obedience to an order from public servant.—Whoever, being legally
bound to attend in person or by an agent at a certain place and time in obedience to a summons, notice,
order, or proclamation proceeding from any public servant legally competent, as such public servant, to
issue the same, intentionally omits to attend at that place or time or departs from the place where he is
bound to attend before the time at which it is lawful for him to depart,—
71
(a) shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or
with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both;
(b) where the summons, notice, order or proclamation is to attend in person or by agent in a
Court with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may
extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both.
Illustrations.
(a) A, being legally bound to appear before a High Court, in obedience to a subpoena issuing
from that Court, intentionally omits to appear. A has committed the offence defined in this section.
(b) A, being legally bound to appear before a District Judge, as a witness, in obedience to a
summons issued by that District Judge intentionally omits to appear. A has committed the offence
defined in this section.
209. Non-appearance in response to a proclamation under section 84 of Bharatiya Nagarik
Suraksha Sanhita, 2023.—Whoever fails to appear at the specified place and the specified time as
required by a proclamation published under sub-section (1) of section 84 of the Bharatiya Nagarik
Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years,
or with fine, or with both, or with community service, and where a declaration has been made under
sub-section (4) of that section pronouncing him as a proclaimed offender, he shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years and shall also be liable to fine.
210. Omission to produce document or electronic record to public servant by person legally
bound to produce it.—Whoever, being legally bound to produce or deliver up any document or
electronic record to any public servant, as such, intentionally omits so to produce or deliver up the
same,—
(a) shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or
with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both;
(b) and where the document or electronic record is to be produced or delivered up to a Court with
simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to
ten thousand rupees, or with both.
Illustration.
A, being legally bound to produce a document before a District Court, intentionally omits to produce
the same. A has committed the offence defined in this section.
211. Omission to give notice or information to public servant by person legally bound to give
it.—Whoever, being legally bound to give any notice or to furnish information on any subject to any
public servant, as such, intentionally omits to give such notice or to furnish such information in the
manner and at the time required by law,—
(a) shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or
with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both;
(b) where the notice or information required to be given respects the commission of an offence,
or is required for the purpose of preventing the commission of an offence, or in order to the
apprehension of an offender, with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months,
or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both;
(c) where the notice or information required to be given is required by an order passed
under section 394 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one
thousand rupees, or with both.
212. Furnishing false information.—Whoever, being legally bound to furnish information on any
subject to any public servant, as such, furnishes, as true, information on the subject which he knows or
has reason to believe to be false,—
72
(a) shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or
with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both;
(b) where the information which he is legally bound to give respects the commission of an
offence, or is required for the purpose of preventing the commission of an offence, or in order to the
apprehension of an offender, with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
two years, or with fine, or with both.
Illustrations.
(a) A, a landholder, knowing of the commission of a murder within the limits of his estate,
wilfully misinforms the Magistrate of the district that the death has occurred by accident in
consequence of the bite of a snake. A is guilty of the offence defined in this section.
(b) A, a village watchman, knowing that a considerable body of strangers has passed through his
village in order to commit a dacoity in the house of Z, a wealthy merchant residing in a neighbouring
place, and being legally bound to give early and punctual information of the above fact to the officer
of the nearest police station, wilfully misinforms the police officer that a body of suspicious
characters passed through the village with a view to commit dacoity in a certain distant place in a
different direction. Here A is guilty of the offence defined in this section.
Explanation.—In section 211 and in this section the word “offence” include any act committed at any
place out of India, which, if committed in India, would be punishable under any of the following sections,
namely, 103, 105, 307, sub-sections (2), (3) and (4) of section 309, sub-sections (2), (3), (4) and (5) of
section 310, 311, 312, clauses (f) and (g) of section 326, sub-sections (4), (6), (7) and (8) of section 331,
clauses (a) and (b) of section 332 and the word “offender” includes any person who is alleged to have
been guilty of any such act.
213. Refusing oath or affirmation when duly required by public servant to make it.—Whoever
refuses to bind himself by an oath or affirmation to state the truth, when required so to bind himself by a
public servant legally competent to require that he shall so bind himself, shall be punished with simple
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand
rupees, or with both.
214. Refusing to answer public servant authorised to question.—Whoever, being legally bound to
state the truth on any subject to any public servant, refuses to answer any question demanded of him
touching that subject by such public servant in the exercise of the legal powers of such public servant,
shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine
which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
215. Refusing to sign statement.—Whoever refuses to sign any statement made by him, when
required to sign that statement by a public servant legally competent to require that he shall sign that
statement, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or
with fine which may extend to three thousand rupees, or with both.
216. False statement on oath or affirmation to public servant or person authorised to
administer an oath or affirmation.—Whoever, being legally bound by an oath or affirmation to state
the truth on any subject to any public servant or other person authorised by law to administer such oath or
affirmation, makes, to such public servant or other person as aforesaid, touching that subject, any
statement which is false, and which he either knows or believes to be false or does not believe to be true,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years,
and shall also be liable to fine.
217. False information, with intent to cause public servant to use his lawful power to injury of
another person—Whoever gives to any public servant any information which he knows or believes to be
false, intending thereby to cause, or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby cause, such public
servant—
(a) to do or omit anything which such public servant ought not to do or omit if the true state of
facts respecting which such information is given were known by him; or
73
(b) to use the lawful power of such public servant to the injury or annoyance of any person,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or
with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both.
Illustrations.
(a) A informs a Magistrate that Z, a police officer, subordinate to such Magistrate, has been
guilty of neglect of duty or misconduct, knowing such information to be false, and knowing it to be
likely that the information will cause the Magistrate to dismiss Z. A has committed the offence
defined in this section.
(b) A falsely informs a public servant that Z has contraband salt in a secret place, knowing such
information to be false, and knowing that it is likely that the consequence of the information will be a
search of Z’s premises, attended with annoyance to Z. A has committed the offence defined in this
section.
(c) A falsely informs a policeman that he has been assaulted and robbed in the neighbourhood of
a particular village. He does not mention the name of any person as one of his assailants, but knows it
to be likely that in consequence of this information the police will make enquiries and institute
searches in the village to the annoyance of the villagers or some of them. A has committed an offence
under this section.
218. Resistance to taking of property by lawful authority of a public servant.—Whoever offers
any resistance to the taking of any property by the lawful authority of any public servant, knowing or
having reason to believe that he is such public servant, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand
rupees, or with both.
219. Obstructing sale of property offered for sale by authority of public servant.—Whoever
intentionally obstructs any sale of property offered for sale by the lawful authority of any public servant,
as such, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one
month, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
220. Illegal purchase or bid for property offered for sale by authority of public servant.—
Whoever, at any sale of property held by the lawful authority of a public servant, as such, purchases or
bids for any property on account of any person, whether himself or any other, whom he knows to be
under a legal incapacity to purchase that property at that sale, or bids for such property not intending to
perform the obligations under which he lays himself by such bidding, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which may
extend to two hundred rupees, or with both.
221. Obstructing public servant in discharge of public functions.—Whoever voluntarily obstructs
any public servant in the discharge of his public functions, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to two thousand
and five hundred rupees, or with both.
222. Omission to assist public servant when bound by law to give assistance.—Whoever, being
bound by law to render or furnish assistance to any public servant in the execution of his public duty,
intentionally omits to give such assistance,—
(a) shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or
with fine which may extend to two thousand and five hundred rupees, or with both;
(b) and where such assistance be demanded of him by a public servant legally competent to make
such demand for the purposes of executing any process lawfully issued by a Court or of preventing
the commission of an offence, or suppressing a riot, or affray, or of apprehending a person charged
with or guilty of an offence, or of having escaped from lawful custody, shall be punished with simple
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to five
thousand rupees, or with both.
74
223. Disobedience to order duly promulgated by public servant.—Whoever, knowing that, by an
order promulgated by a public servant lawfully empowered to promulgate such order, he is directed to
abstain from a certain act, or to take certain order with certain property in his possession or under his
management, disobeys such direction,—
(a) shall, if such disobedience causes or tends to cause obstruction, annoyance or injury, or risk
of obstruction, annoyance or injury, to any person lawfully employed, be punished with simple
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to two
thousand and five hundred rupees, or with both;
(b) and where such disobedience causes or tends to cause danger to human life, health or safety,
or causes or tends to cause a riot or affray, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or
with both.
Explanation.—It is not necessary that the offender should intend to produce harm, or contemplate his
disobedience as likely to produce harm. It is sufficient that he knows of the order which he disobeys, and
that his disobedience produces, or is likely to produce, harm.
Illustration.
An order is promulgated by a public servant lawfully empowered to promulgate such order, directing
that a religious procession shall not pass down a certain street. A knowingly disobeys the order, and
thereby causes danger of riot. A has committed the offence defined in this section.
224. Threat of injury to public servant.—Whoever holds out any threat of injury to any public
servant, or to any person in whom he believes that public servant to be interested, for the purpose of
inducing that public servant to do any act, or to forbear or delay to do any act, connected with the
exercise of the public functions of such public servant, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
225. Threat of injury to induce person to refrain from applying for protection to public
servant.—Whoever holds out any threat of injury to any person for the purpose of inducing that person
to refrain or desist from making a legal application for protection against any injury to any public servant
legally empowered as such to give such protection, or to cause such protection to be given, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine,
or with both.
226. Attempt to commit suicide to compel or restrain exercise of lawful power.—Whoever
attempts to commit suicide with the intent to compel or restrain any public servant from discharging his
official duty shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or
with fine, or with both, or with community service.
CHAPTER XIV
OF FALSE EVIDENCE AND OFFENCES AGAINST PUBLIC JUSTICE
227. Giving false evidence.—Whoever, being legally bound by an oath or by an express provision of
law to state the truth, or being bound by law to make a declaration upon any subject, makes any statement
which is false, and which he either knows or believes to be false or does not believe to be true, is said to
give false evidence.
Explanation 1.—A statement is within the meaning of this section, whether it is made verbally or
otherwise.
Explanation 2.—A false statement as to the belief of the person attesting is within the meaning of this
section, and a person may be guilty of giving false evidence by stating that he believes a thing which he
does not believe, as well as by stating that he knows a thing which he does not know.
Illustrations.
75
(a) A, in support of a just claim which B has against Z for one thousand rupees, falsely swears on a
trial that he heard Z admit the justice of B’s claim. A has given false evidence.
(b) A, being bound by an oath to state the truth, states that he believes a certain signature to be the
handwriting of Z, when he does not believe it to be the handwriting of Z. Here A states that which he
knows to be false, and therefore gives false evidence.
(c) A, knowing the general character of Z’s handwriting, states that he believes a certain signature to
be the handwriting of Z; A in good faith believing it to be so. Here A’s statement is merely as to his
belief, and is true as to his belief, and therefore, although the signature may not be the handwriting of Z,
A has not given false evidence.
(d) A, being bound by an oath to state the truth, states that he knows that Z was at a particular place
on a particular day, not knowing anything upon the subject. A gives false evidence whether Z was at that
place on the day named or not.
(e) A, an interpreter or translator, gives or certifies as a true interpretation or translation of a
statement or document which he is bound by oath to interpret or translate truly, that which is not and
which he does not believe to be a true interpretation or translation. A has given false evidence.
228. Fabricating false evidence.—Whoever causes any circumstance to exist or makes any false
entry in any book or record, or electronic record or makes any document or electronic record containing a
false statement, intending that such circumstance, false entry or false statement may appear in evidence in
a judicial proceeding, or in a proceeding taken by law before a public servant as such, or before an
arbitrator, and that such circumstance, false entry or false statement, so appearing in evidence, may cause
any person who in such proceeding is to form an opinion upon the evidence, to entertain an erroneous
opinion touching any point material to the result of such proceeding is said “to fabricate false evidence”.
Illustrations.
(a) A puts jewels into a box belonging to Z, with the intention that they may be found in that box, and
that this circumstance may cause Z to be convicted of theft. A has fabricated false evidence.
(b) A makes a false entry in his shop-book for the purpose of using it as corroborative evidence in a
Court. A has fabricated false evidence.
(c) A, with the intention of causing Z to be convicted of a criminal conspiracy, writes a letter in
imitation of Z’s handwriting, purporting to be addressed to an accomplice in such criminal conspiracy,
and puts the letter in a place which he knows that the officers of the police are likely to search. A has
fabricated false evidence.
229. Punishment for false evidence.—(1) Whoever intentionally gives false evidence in any stage
of a judicial proceeding, or fabricates false evidence for the purpose of being used in any stage of a
judicial proceeding, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees.
(2) Whoever intentionally gives or fabricates false evidence in any case other than that referred to in
sub-section (1), shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
three years, and shall also be liable to fine which may extend to five thousand rupees.
Explanation 1.—A trial before a Court-martial is a judicial proceeding.
Explanation 2.—An investigation directed by law preliminary to a proceeding before a Court, is a
stage of a judicial proceeding, though that investigation may not take place before a Court.
Illustration.
A, in an enquiry before a Magistrate for the purpose of ascertaining whether Z ought to be committed
for trial, makes on oath a statement which he knows to be false. As this enquiry is a stage of a judicial
proceeding, A has given false evidence.
76
Explanation 3.—An investigation directed by a Court according to law, and conducted under the
authority of a Court, is a stage of a judicial proceeding, though that investigation may not take place
before a Court.
Illustration.
A, in an enquiry before an officer deputed by a Court to ascertain on the spot the boundaries of land,
makes on oath a statement which he knows to be false. As this enquiry is a stage of a judicial proceeding,
A has given false evidence.
230. Giving or fabricating false evidence with intent to procure conviction of capital offence.—
(1) Whoever gives or fabricates false evidence, intending thereby to cause, or knowing it to be likely that
he will thereby cause, any person to be convicted of an offence which is capital by the law for the time
being in force in India shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with rigorous imprisonment for a
term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine which may extend to fifty thousand
rupees.
(2) If an innocent person be convicted and executed in consequence of false evidence referred to in
sub-section (1), the person who gives such false evidence shall be punished either with death or the
punishment specified in sub-section (1).
231. Giving or fabricating false evidence with intent to procure conviction of offence punishable
with imprisonment for life or imprisonment.—Whoever gives or fabricates false evidence intending
thereby to cause, or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby cause, any person to be convicted of an
offence which by the law for the time being in force in India is not capital, but punishable with
imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for a term of seven years or upwards, shall be punished as a
person convicted of that offence would be liable to be punished.
Illustration.
A gives false evidence before a Court, intending thereby to cause Z to be convicted of a dacoity. The
punishment of dacoity is imprisonment for life, or rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to
ten years, with or without fine. A, therefore, is liable to imprisonment for life or imprisonment, with or
without fine.
232. Threatening any person to give false evidence.—(1) Whoever threatens another with any
injury to his person, reputation or property or to the person or reputation of any one in whom that person
is interested, with intent to cause that person to give false evidence shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both.
(2) If innocent person is convicted and sentenced in consequence of false evidence referred to in
sub-section (1), with death or imprisonment for more than seven years, the person who threatens shall be
punished with the same punishment and sentence in the same manner and to the same extent such
innocent person is punished and sentenced.
233. Using evidence known to be false.—Whoever corruptly uses or attempts to use as true or
genuine evidence any evidence which he knows to be false or fabricated, shall be punished in the same
manner as if he gave or fabricated false evidence.
234. Issuing or signing false certificate.—Whoever issues or signs any certificate required by law to
be given or signed, or relating to any fact of which such certificate is by law admissible in evidence,
knowing or believing that such certificate is false in any material point, shall be punished in the same
manner as if he gave false evidence.
235. Using as true a certificate known to be false.—Whoever corruptly uses or attempts to use any
such certificate as a true certificate, knowing the same to be false in any material point, shall be punished
in the same manner as if he gave false evidence.
236. False statement made in declaration which is by law receivable as evidence.—Whoever, in
any declaration made or subscribed by him, which declaration any Court or any public servant or other
77
person, is bound or authorised by law to receive as evidence of any fact, makes any statement which is
false, and which he either knows or believes to be false or does not believe to be true, touching any point
material to the object for which the declaration is made or used, shall be punished in the same manner as
if he gave false evidence.
237. Using as true such declaration knowing it to be false.—Whoever corruptly uses or attempts to
use as true any such declaration, knowing the same to be false in any material point, shall be punished in
the same manner as if he gave false evidence.
Explanation.—A declaration which is inadmissible merely upon the ground of some informality, is a
declaration within the meaning of section 236 and this section.
238. Causing disappearance of evidence of offence, or giving false information to screen
offender.—Whoever, knowing or having reason to believe that an offence has been committed, causes
any evidence of the commission of that offence to disappear, with the intention of screening the offender
from legal punishment, or with that intention gives any information respecting the offence which he
knows or believes to be false shall,—
(a) if the offence which he knows or believes to have been committed is punishable with death,
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and
shall also be liable to fine;
(b) if the offence is punishable with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment which may
extend to ten years, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend
to three years, and shall also be liable to fine;
(c) if the offence is punishable with imprisonment for any term not extending to ten years, be
punished with imprisonment of the description provided for the offence, for a term which may extend
to one-fourth part of the longest term of the imprisonment provided for the offence, or with fine, or
with both.
Illustration.
A, knowing that B has murdered Z, assists B to hide the body with the intention of screening B from
punishment. A is liable to imprisonment of either description for seven years, and also to fine.
239. Intentional omission to give information of offence by person bound to inform.—Whoever,
knowing or having reason to believe that an offence has been committed, intentionally omits to give any
information respecting that offence which he is legally bound to give, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may
extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
240. Giving false information respecting an offence committed.—Whoever, knowing or having
reason to believe that an offence has been committed, gives any information respecting that offence
which he knows or believes to be false, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
Explanation.—In sections 238 and 239 and in this section the word “offence” includes any act
committed at any place out of India, which, if committed in India, would be punishable under any of the
following sections, namely, 103, 105, 307, sub-sections (2), (3) and (4) of section 309, sub-sections (2),
(3), (4) and (5) of section 310, 311, 312, clauses (f) and (g) of section 326, sub-sections (4), (6), (7) and
(8) of section 331, clauses (a) and (b) of section 332.
241. Destruction of document or electronic record to prevent its production as evidence.—
Whoever secretes or destroys any document or electronic record which he may be lawfully compelled to
produce as evidence in a Court or in any proceeding lawfully held before a public servant, as such, or
obliterates or renders illegible the whole or any part of such document or electronic record with the
intention of preventing the same from being produced or used as evidence before such Court or public
servant as aforesaid, or after he shall have been lawfully summoned or required to produce the same for
that purpose, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
three years, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
78
242. False personation for purpose of act or proceeding in suit or prosecution.—Whoever falsely
personates another, and in such assumed character makes any admission or statement, or confesses
judgment, or causes any process to be issued or becomes bail or security, or does any other act in any suit
or criminal prosecution, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
243. Fraudulent removal or concealment of property to prevent its seizure as forfeited or in
execution.—Whoever fraudulently removes, conceals, transfers or delivers to any person any property or
any interest therein, intending thereby to prevent that property or interest therein from being taken as a
forfeiture or in satisfaction of a fine, under a sentence which has been pronounced, or which he knows to
be likely to be pronounced, by a Court or other competent authority, or from being taken in execution of a
decree or order which has been made, or which he knows to be likely to be made by a Court in a civil
suit, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three
years, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
244. Fraudulent claim to property to prevent its seizure as forfeited or in execution.—Whoever
fraudulently accepts, receives or claims any property or any interest therein, knowing that he has no right
or rightful claim to such property or interest, or practises any deception touching any right to any
property or any interest therein, intending thereby to prevent that property or interest therein from being
taken as a forfeiture or in satisfaction of a fine, under a sentence which has been pronounced, or which he
knows to be likely to be pronounced by a Court or other competent authority, or from being taken in
execution of a decree or order which has been made, or which he knows to be likely to be made by a
Court in a civil suit, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
245. Fraudulently suffering decree for sum not due.—Whoever fraudulently causes or suffers a
decree or order to be passed against him at the suit of any person for a sum not due or for a larger sum
than is due to such person or for any property or interest in property to which such person is not entitled,
or fraudulently causes or suffers a decree or order to be executed against him after it has been satisfied, or
for anything in respect of which it has been satisfied, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
Illustration.
A institutes a suit against Z. Z, knowing that A is likely to obtain a decree against him, fraudulently
suffers a judgment to pass against him for a larger amount at the suit of B, who has no just claim against
him, in order that B, either on his own account or for the benefit of Z, may share in the proceeds of any
sale of Z’s property which may be made under A’s decree. Z has committed an offence under this
section.
246. Dishonestly making false claim in Court.—Whoever fraudulently or dishonestly, or with
intent to injure or annoy any person, makes in a Court any claim which he knows to be false, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, and shall
also be liable to fine.
247. Fraudulently obtaining decree for sum not due.—Whoever fraudulently obtains a decree or
order against any person for a sum not due, or for a larger sum than is due or for any property or interest
in property to which he is not entitled, or fraudulently causes a decree or order to be executed against any
person after it has been satisfied or for anything in respect of which it has been satisfied, or fraudulently
suffers or permits any such act to be done in his name, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
248. False charge of offence made with intent to injure.—Whoever, with intent to cause injury to
any person, institutes or causes to be instituted any criminal proceeding against that person, or falsely
charges any person with having committed an offence, knowing that there is no just or lawful ground for
such proceeding or charge against that person,—
(a) shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five
years, or with fine which may extend to two lakh rupees, or with both;
79
(b) if such criminal proceeding be instituted on a false charge of an offence punishable with
death, imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for ten years or upwards, shall be punishable with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable
to fine.
249. Harbouring offender.—Whenever an offence has been committed, whoever harbours or
conceals a person whom he knows or has reason to believe to be the offender, with the intention of
screening him from legal punishment shall,—
(a) if the offence is punishable with death, be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to five years, and shall also be liable to fine;
(b) if the offence is punishable with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment which may
extend to ten years, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend
to three years, and shall also be liable to fine;
(c) if the offence is punishable with imprisonment which may extend to one year, and not to ten
years, be punished with imprisonment of the description provided for the offence for a term which
may extend to one-fourth part of the longest term of imprisonment provided for the offence, or with
fine, or with both.
Explanation.— “Offence” in this section includes any act committed at any place out of India, which,
if committed in India, would be punishable under any of the following sections, namely, 103, 105, 307,
sub-sections (2), (3) and (4) of section 309, sub-sections (2), (3), (4) and (5) of section 310, 311, 312,
clauses (f) and (g) of section 326, sub-sections (4), (6), (7) and (8) of section 331, clauses (a) and (b) of
section 332 and every such act shall, for the purposes of this section, be deemed to be punishable as if the
accused person had been guilty of it in India.
Exception.—This section shall not extend to any case in which the harbour or concealment is by the
spouse of the offender.
Illustration.
A, knowing that B has committed dacoity, knowingly conceals B in order to screen him from legal
punishment. Here, as B is liable to imprisonment for life, A is liable to imprisonment of either description
for a term not exceeding three years, and is also liable to fine.
250. Taking gift, etc., to screen an offender from punishment.—Whoever accepts or attempts to
obtain, or agrees to accept, any gratification for himself or any other person, or any restitution of property
to himself or any other person, in consideration of his concealing an offence or of his screening any
person from legal punishment for any offence, or of his not proceeding against any person for the purpose
of bringing him to legal punishment shall,—
(a) if the offence is punishable with death, be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine;
(b) if the offence is punishable with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment which may
extend to ten years, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend
to three years, and shall also be liable to fine;
(c) if the offence is punishable with imprisonment not extending to ten years, be punished with
imprisonment of the description provided for the offence for a term which may extend to one-fourth
part of the longest term of imprisonment provided for the offence, or with fine, or with both.
251. Offering gift or restoration of property in consideration of screening offender.—Whoever
gives or causes, or offers or agrees to give or cause, any gratification to any person, or restores or causes
the restoration of any property to any person, in consideration of that person’s concealing an offence, or
of his screening any person from legal punishment for any offence, or of his not proceeding against any
person for the purpose of bringing him to legal punishment shall,—
(a) if the offence is punishable with death, be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine;
80
(b) if the offence is punishable with imprisonment for life or with imprisonment which may
extend to ten years, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend
to three years, and shall also be liable to fine;
(c) if the offence is punishable with imprisonment not extending to ten years, be punished with
imprisonment of the description provided for the offence for a term which may extend to one-fourth
part of the longest term of imprisonment provided for the offence, or with fine, or with both.
Exception.—The provisions of this section and section 250 do not extend to any case in which the
offence may lawfully be compounded.
252. Taking gift to help to recover stolen property, etc.—Whoever takes or agrees or consents to
take any gratification under pretence or on account of helping any person to recover any movable
property of which he shall have been deprived by any offence punishable under this Sanhita, shall, unless
he uses all means in his power to cause the offender to be apprehended and convicted of the offence, be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine,
or with both.
253. Harbouring offender who has escaped from custody or whose apprehension has been
ordered.—Whenever any person convicted of or charged with an offence, being in lawful custody for
that offence, escapes from such custody, or whenever a public servant, in the exercise of the lawful
powers of such public servant, orders a certain person to be apprehended for an offence, whoever,
knowing of such escape or order for apprehension, harbours or conceals that person with the intention of
preventing him from being apprehended, shall be punished in the manner following, namely:—
(a) if the offence for which the person was in custody or is ordered to be apprehended is
punishable with death, he shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine;
(b) if the offence is punishable with imprisonment for life or imprisonment for ten years, he shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, with
or without fine;
(c) if the offence is punishable with imprisonment which may extend to one year and not to ten
years, he shall be punished with imprisonment of the description provided for the offence for a term
which may extend to one-fourth part of the longest term of the imprisonment provided for such
offence, or with fine, or with both.
Explanation.—“Offence” in this section includes also any act or omission of which a person is
alleged to have been guilty out of India, which, if he had been guilty of it in India, would have been
punishable as an offence, and for which he is, under any law relating to extradition, or otherwise, liable to
be apprehended or detained in custody in India, and every such act or omission shall, for the purposes of
this section, be deemed to be punishable as if the accused person had been guilty of it in India.
Exception.—The provisions of this section do not extend to the case in which the harbour or
concealment is by the spouse of the person to be apprehended.
254. Penalty for harbouring robbers or dacoits.—Whoever, knowing or having reason to believe
that any persons are about to commit or have recently committed robbery or dacoity, harbours them or
any of them, with the intention of facilitating the commission of such robbery or dacoity, or of screening
them or any of them from punishment, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which
may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section it is immaterial whether the robbery or dacoity is
intended to be committed, or has been committed, within or without India.
Exception.—The provisions of this section do not extend to the case in which the harbour is by the
spouse of the offender.
255.—Public servant disobeying direction of law with intent to save person from punishment or
property from forfeiture.—Whoever, being a public servant, knowingly disobeys any direction of the
law as to the way in which he is to conduct himself as such public servant, intending thereby to save, or
81
knowing it to be likely that he will thereby save, any person from legal punishment, or subject him to a
less punishment than that to which he is liable, or with intent to save, or knowing that he is likely thereby
to save, any property from forfeiture or any charge to which it is liable by law, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
256. Public servant framing incorrect record or writing with intent to save person from
punishment or property from forfeiture.—Whoever, being a public servant, and being as such public
servant, charged with the preparation of any record or other writing, frames that record or writing in a
manner which he knows to be incorrect, with intent to cause, or knowing it to be likely that he will
thereby cause, loss or injury to the public or to any person, or with intent thereby to save, or knowing it to
be likely that he will thereby save, any person from legal punishment, or with intent to save, or knowing
that he is likely thereby to save, any property from forfeiture or other charge to which it is liable by law,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or
with fine, or with both.
257. Public servant in judicial proceeding corruptly making report, etc., contrary to law.—
Whoever, being a public servant, corruptly or maliciously makes or pronounces in any stage of a judicial
proceeding, any report, order, verdict, or decision which he knows to be contrary to law, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, or with
fine, or with both.
258. Commitment for trial or confinement by person having authority who knows that he is
acting contrary to law.—Whoever, being in any office which gives him legal authority to commit
persons for trial or to confinement, or to keep persons in confinement, corruptly or maliciously commits
any person for trial or to confinement, or keeps any person in confinement, in the exercise of that
authority knowing that in so doing he is acting contrary to law, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both.
259. Intentional omission to apprehend on part of public servant bound to apprehend.—
Whoever, being a public servant, legally bound as such public servant to apprehend or to keep in
confinement any person charged with or liable to be apprehended for an offence, intentionally omits to
apprehend such person, or intentionally suffers such person to escape, or intentionally aids such person in
escaping or attempting to escape from such confinement, shall be punished,—
(a) with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, with or
without fine, if the person in confinement, or who ought to have been apprehended, was charged
with, or liable to be apprehended for, an offence punishable with death; or
(b) with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, with or
without fine, if the person in confinement, or who ought to have been apprehended, was charged
with, or liable to be apprehended for, an offence punishable with imprisonment for life or
imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years; or
(c) with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, with or
without fine, if the person in confinement, or who ought to have been apprehended, was charged
with, or liable to be apprehended for, an offence punishable with imprisonment for a term less than
ten years.
260. Intentional omission to apprehend on part of public servant bound to apprehend person
under sentence or lawfully committed.—Whoever, being a public servant, legally bound as such public
servant to apprehend or to keep in confinement any person under sentence of a Court for any offence or
lawfully committed to custody, intentionally omits to apprehend such person, or intentionally suffers such
person to escape or intentionally aids such person in escaping or attempting to escape from such
confinement, shall be punished,—
(a) with imprisonment for life or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to fourteen years, with or without fine, if the person in confinement, or who ought to have
been apprehended, is under sentence of death; or
82
(b) with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, with or
without fine, if the person in confinement or who ought to have been apprehended, is subject, by a
sentence of a Court, or by virtue of a commutation of such sentence, to imprisonment for life or
imprisonment for a term of ten years, or upwards; or
(c) with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with
fine, or with both, if the person in confinement or who ought to have been apprehended, is subject by
a sentence of a Court to imprisonment for a term not extending to ten years or if the person was
lawfully committed to custody.
261. Escape from confinement or custody negligently suffered by public servant.—Whoever,
being a public servant legally bound as such public servant to keep in confinement any person charged
with or convicted of any offence or lawfully committed to custody, negligently suffers such person to
escape from confinement, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to
two years, or with fine, or with both.
262. Resistance or obstruction by a person to his lawful apprehension.—Whoever intentionally
offers any resistance or illegal obstruction to the lawful apprehension of himself for any offence with
which he is charged or of which he has been convicted, or escapes or attempts to escape from any
custody in which he is lawfully detained for any such offence, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
Explanation.—The punishment in this section is in addition to the punishment for which the person
to be apprehended or detained in custody was liable for the offence with which he was charged, or of
which he was convicted.
263. Resistance or obstruction to lawful apprehension of another person.—Whoever,
intentionally offers any resistance or illegal obstruction to the lawful apprehension of any other person for
an offence, or rescues or attempts to rescue any other person from any custody in which that person is
lawfully detained for an offence,—
(a) shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two
years, or with fine, or with both; or
(b) if the person to be apprehended, or the person rescued or attempted to be rescued, is charged
with or liable to be apprehended for an offence punishable with imprisonment for life or
imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine; or
(c) if the person to be apprehended or rescued, or attempted to be rescued, is charged with or
liable to be apprehended for an offence punishable with death, shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine; or
(d) if the person to be apprehended or rescued, or attempted to be rescued, is liable under the
sentence of a Court or by virtue of a commutation of such a sentence, to imprisonment for life, or
imprisonment for a term of ten years or upwards, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine; or
(e) if the person to be apprehended or rescued, or attempted to be rescued, is under sentence of
death, shall be punished with imprisonment for life or imprisonment of either description for a term
not exceeding ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
264. Omission to apprehend, or sufferance of escape, on part of public servant, in cases not
otherwise provided for.—Whoever, being a public servant legally bound as such public servant to
apprehend, or to keep in confinement, any person in any case not provided for in section 259, section 260
or section 261, or in any other law for the time being in force, omits to apprehend that person or suffers
him to escape from confinement, shall be punished—
(a) if he does so intentionally, with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to three years, or with fine, or with both; and
83
(b) if he does so negligently, with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to two
years, or with fine, or with both.
265. Resistance or obstruction to lawful apprehension or escape or rescue in cases not otherwise
provided for.—Whoever, in any case not provided for in section 262 or section 263 or in any other law
for the time being in force, intentionally offers any resistance or illegal obstruction to the lawful
apprehension of himself or of any other person, or escapes or attempts to escape from any custody in
which he is lawfully detained, or rescues or attempts to rescue any other person from any custody in
which that person is lawfully detained, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.
266. Violation of condition of remission of punishment.—Whoever, having accepted any
conditional remission of punishment, knowingly violates any condition on which such remission was
granted, shall be punished with the punishment to which he was originally sentenced, if he has already
suffered no part of that punishment, and if he has suffered any part of that punishment, then with so much
of that punishment as he has not already suffered.
267. Intentional insult or interruption to public servant sitting in judicial proceeding.—
Whoever, intentionally offers any insult, or causes any interruption to any public servant, while such
public servant is sitting in any stage of a judicial proceeding, shall be punished with simple imprisonment
for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or
with both.
268. Personation of assessor.—Whoever, by personation or otherwise, shall intentionally cause, or
knowingly suffer himself to be returned, empanelled or sworn as an assessor in any case in which he
knows that he is not entitled by law to be so returned, empanelled or sworn, or knowing himself to have
been so returned, empanelled or sworn contrary to law, shall voluntarily serve as such assessor, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine,
or with both.
269. Failure by person released on bail bond or bond to appear in Court.—Whoever, having
been charged with an offence and released on bail bond or on bond, fails without sufficient cause (the
burden of proving which shall lie upon him), to appear in Court in accordance with the terms of the bail
or bond, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one
year, or with fine, or with both.
Explanation.—The punishment under this section is—
(a) in addition to the punishment to which the offender would be liable on a conviction for the
offence with which he has been charged; and
(b) without prejudice to the power of the Court to order forfeiture of the bond.
CHAPTER XV
OF OFFENCES AFFECTING THE PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY, CONVENIENCE, DECENCY AND MORALS
270. Public nuisance.—A person is guilty of a public nuisance who does any act or is guilty of an
illegal omission which causes any common injury, danger or annoyance to the public or to the people in
general who dwell or occupy property in the vicinity, or which must necessarily cause injury, obstruction,
danger or annoyance to persons who may have occasion to use any public right but a common nuisance is
not excused on the ground that it causes some convenience or advantage.
271. Negligent act likely to spread infection of disease dangerous to life.—Whoever unlawfully or
negligently does any act which is, and which he knows or has reason to believe to be, likely to spread the
infection of any disease dangerous to life, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.
272. Malignant act likely to spread infection of disease dangerous to life.—Whoever malignantly
does any act which is, and which he knows or has reason to believe to be, likely to spread the infection of
84
any disease dangerous to life, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
273. Disobedience to quarantine rule.—Whoever knowingly disobeys any rule made by the
Government for putting any mode of transport into a state of quarantine, or for regulating the intercourse
of any such transport in a state of quarantine or for regulating the intercourse between places where an
infectious disease prevails and other places, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.
274. Adulteration of food or drink intended for sale.—Whoever adulterates any article of food or
drink, so as to make such article noxious as food or drink, intending to sell such article as food or drink,
or knowing it to be likely that the same will be sold as food or drink, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may
extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
275. Sale of noxious food or drink.—Whoever sells, or offers or exposes for sale, as food or drink,
any article which has been rendered or has become noxious, or is in a state unfit for food or drink,
knowing or having reason to believe that the same is noxious as food or drink, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may
extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
276. Adulteration of drugs.—Whoever adulterates any drug or medical preparation in such a
manner as to lessen the efficacy or change the operation of such drug or medical preparation, or to make
it noxious, intending that it shall be sold or used for, or knowing it to be likely that it will be sold or used
for, any medicinal purpose, as if it had not undergone such adulteration, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may
extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
277. Sale of adulterated drugs.—Whoever, knowing any drug or medical preparation to have been
adulterated in such a manner as to lessen its efficacy, to change its operation, or to render it noxious, sells
the same, or offers or exposes it for sale, or issues it from any dispensary for medicinal purposes as
unadulterated, or causes it to be used for medicinal purposes by any person not knowing of the
adulteration, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
six months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
278. Sale of drug as a different drug or preparation.—Whoever knowingly sells, or offers or
exposes for sale, or issues from a dispensary for medicinal purposes, any drug or medical preparation, as
a different drug or medical preparation, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with
both.
279. Fouling water of public spring or reservoir.—Whoever voluntarily corrupts or fouls the water
of any public spring or reservoir, so as to render it less fit for the purpose for which it is ordinarily used,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or
with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
280. Making atmosphere noxious to health.—Whoever voluntarily vitiates the atmosphere in any
place so as to make it noxious to the health of persons in general dwelling or carrying on business in the
neighbourhood or passing along a public way, shall be punished with fine which may extend to one
thousand rupees.
281. Rash driving or riding on a public way.—Whoever drives any vehicle, or rides, on any public
way in a manner so rash or negligent as to endanger human life, or to be likely to cause hurt or injury to
any other person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend
to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
282. Rash navigation of vessel.—Whoever navigates any vessel in a manner so rash or negligent as
to endanger human life, or to be likely to cause hurt or injury to any other person, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may
extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both.
85
283. Exhibition of false light, mark or buoy.—Whoever exhibits any false light, mark or buoy,
intending or knowing it to be likely that such exhibition will mislead any navigator, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and with fine which
shall not be less than ten thousand rupees.
284. Conveying person by water for hire in unsafe or overloaded vessel.—Whoever knowingly or
negligently conveys, or causes to be conveyed for hire, any person by water in any vessel, when that
vessel is in such a state or so loaded as to endanger the life of that person, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may
extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
285. Danger or obstruction in public way or line of navigation.—Whoever, by doing any act, or
by omitting to take order with any property in his possession or under his charge, causes danger,
obstruction or injury to any person in any public way or public line of navigation, shall be punished with
fine which may extend to five thousand rupees.
286. Negligent conduct with respect to poisonous substance.—Whoever does, with any poisonous
substance, any act in a manner so rash or negligent as to endanger human life, or to be likely to cause hurt
or injury to any person or knowingly or negligently omits to take such order with any poisonous
substance in his possession as is sufficient to guard against any probable danger to human life from such
poisonous substance, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
287. Negligent conduct with respect to fire or combustible matter.—Whoever does, with fire or
any combustible matter, any act so rashly or negligently as to endanger human life, or to be likely to
cause hurt or injury to any other person or knowingly or negligently omits to take such order with any fire
or any combustible matter in his possession as is sufficient to guard against any probable danger to
human life from such fire or combustible matter, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to two thousand
rupees, or with both.
288. Negligent conduct with respect to explosive substance.—Whoever does, with any explosive
substance, any act so rashly or negligently as to endanger human life, or to be likely to cause hurt or
injury to any other person, or knowingly or negligently omits to take such order with any explosive
substance in his possession as is sufficient to guard against any probable danger to human life from that
substance, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six
months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
289. Negligent conduct with respect to machinery.—Whoever does, with any machinery, any act
so rashly or negligently as to endanger human life or to be likely to cause hurt or injury to any other
person or knowingly or negligently omits to take such order with any machinery in his possession or
under his care as is sufficient to guard against any probable danger to human life from such machinery,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or
with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
290. Negligent conduct with respect to pulling down, repairing or constructing buildings, etc.—
Whoever, in pulling down, repairing or constructing any building, knowingly or negligently omits to take
such measures with that building as is sufficient to guard against any probable danger to human life from
the fall of that building, or of any part thereof, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or
with both.
291. Negligent conduct with respect to animal.—Whoever knowingly or negligently omits to take
such measures with any animal in his possession as is sufficient to guard against any probable danger to
human life, or any probable danger of grievous hurt from such animal, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may
extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
86
292. Punishment for public nuisance in cases not otherwise provided for.—Whoever commits a
public nuisance in any case not otherwise punishable by this Sanhita shall be punished with fine which
may extend to one thousand rupees.
293. Continuance of nuisance after injunction to discontinue.—Whoever repeats or continues a
public nuisance, having been enjoined by any public servant who has lawful authority to issue such
injunction not to repeat or continue such nuisance, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term
which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees or with both.
294. Sale, etc., of obscene books, etc.—(1) For the purposes of sub-section (2), a book, pamphlet,
paper, writing, drawing, painting, representation, figure or any other object, including display of any
content in electronic form shall be deemed to be obscene if it is lascivious or appeals to the prurient
interest or if its effect, or (where it comprises two or more distinct items) the effect of any one of its
items, is, if taken as a whole, such as to tend to deprave and corrupt persons who are likely, having regard
to all relevant circumstances, to read, see or hear the matter contained or embodied in it.
(2) Whoever—
(a) sells, lets to hire, distributes, publicly exhibits or in any manner puts into circulation, or for
purposes of sale, hire, distribution, public exhibition or circulation, makes, produces or has in his
possession any obscene book, pamphlet, paper, drawing, painting, representation or figure or any
other obscene object whatsoever in whatever manner; or
(b) imports, exports or conveys any obscene object for any of the purposes aforesaid, or knowing
or having reason to believe that such object will be sold, let to hire, distributed or publicly exhibited
or in any manner put into circulation; or
(c) takes part in or receives profits from any business in the course of which he knows or has
reason to believe that any such obscene objects are, for any of the purposes aforesaid, made
produced, purchased, kept, imported, exported, conveyed, publicly exhibited or in any manner put
into circulation; or
(d) advertises or makes known by any means whatsoever that any person is engaged or is ready
to engage in any act which is an offence under this section, or that any such obscene object can be
procured from or through any person; or
(e) offers or attempts to do any act which is an offence under this section,
shall be punished on first conviction with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to two years, and with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, and, in the event of a
second or subsequent conviction, with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
five years, and also with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees.
Exception.—This section does not extend to—
(a) any book, pamphlet, paper, writing, drawing, painting, representation or figure—
(i) the publication of which is proved to be justified as being for the public good on the
ground that such book, pamphlet, paper, writing, drawing, painting, representation or figure is in
the interest of science, literature, art or learning or other objects of general concern; or
(ii) which is kept or used bona fide for religious purposes;
(b) any representation sculptured, engraved, painted or otherwise represented on or in—
(i) any ancient monument within the meaning of the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological
Sites and Remains Act, 1958 (24 of 1958); or
(ii) any temple, or on any car used for the conveyance of idols, or kept or used for any
religious purpose.
295. Sale, etc., of obscene objects to child.—Whoever sells, lets to hire, distributes, exhibits or
circulates to any child any such obscene object as is referred to in section 294, or offers or attempts so to
87
do, shall be punished on first conviction with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to three years, and with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, and, in the event of a
second or subsequent conviction, with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
seven years, and also with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees.
296. Obscene acts and songs.—Whoever, to the annoyance of others,—
(a) does any obscene act in any public place; or
(b) sings, recites or utters any obscene song, ballad or words, in or near any public place,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three months,
or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
297. Keeping lottery office.—(1) Whoever keeps any office or place for the purpose of drawing any
lottery not being a State lottery or a lottery authorised by the State Government, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.
(2) Whoever publishes any proposal to pay any sum, or to deliver any goods, or to do or forbear from
doing anything for the benefit of any person, on any event or contingency relative or applicable to the
drawing of any ticket, lot, number or figure in any such lottery, shall be punished with fine which may
extend to five thousand rupees.
CHAPTER XVI
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO RELIGION
298. Injuring or defiling place of worship with intent to insult religion of any class.—Whoever
destroys, damages or defiles any place of worship, or any object held sacred by any class of persons with
the intention of thereby insulting the religion of any class of persons or with the knowledge that any class
of persons is likely to consider such destruction, damage or defilement as an insult to their religion, shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with
fine, or with both.
299. Deliberate and malicious acts, intended to outrage religious feelings of any class by
insulting its religion or religious beliefs.—Whoever, with deliberate and malicious intention of
outraging the religious feelings of any class of citizens of India, by words, either spoken or written, or by
signs or by visible representations or through electronic means or otherwise, insults or attempts to insult
the religion or the religious beliefs of that class, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
300. Disturbing religious assembly.—Whoever voluntarily causes disturbance to any assembly
lawfully engaged in the performance of religious worship, or religious ceremonies, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.
301. Trespassing on burial places, etc.—Whoever, with the intention of wounding the feelings of
any person, or of insulting the religion of any person, or with the knowledge that the feelings of any
person are likely to be wounded, or that the religion of any person is likely to be insulted thereby,
commits any trespass in any place of worship or on any place of sepulchre, or any place set apart for the
performance of funeral rites or as a depository for the remains of the dead, or offers any indignity to any
human corpse, or causes disturbance to any persons assembled for the performance of funeral
ceremonies, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
one year, or with fine, or with both.
302. Uttering words, etc., with deliberate intent to wound religious feelings of any person.—
Whoever, with the deliberate intention of wounding the religious feelings of any person, utters any word
or makes any sound in the hearing of that person or makes any gesture in the sight of that person or
places any object in the sight of that person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.
88
CHAPTER XVII
OF OFFENCES AGAINST PROPERTY
Of theft
303. Theft.—(1) Whoever, intending to take dishonestly any movable property out of the possession
of any person without that person’s consent, moves that property in order to such taking, is said to
commit theft.
Explanation 1.—A thing so long as it is attached to the earth, not being movable property, is not the
subject of theft; but it becomes capable of being the subject of theft as soon as it is severed from the
earth.
Explanation 2.—A moving effected by the same act which affects the severance may be a theft.
Explanation 3.—A person is said to cause a thing to move by removing an obstacle which prevented
it from moving or by separating it from any other thing, as well as by actually moving it.
Explanation 4.—A person, who by any means causes an animal to move, is said to move that animal,
and to move everything which, in consequence of the motion so caused, is moved by that animal.
Explanation 5.—The consent mentioned in this section may be express or implied, and may be given
either by the person in possession, or by any person having for that purpose authority either express or
implied.
Illustrations.
(a) A cuts down a tree on Z’s ground, with the intention of dishonestly taking the tree out of Z’s
possession without Z’s consent. Here, as soon as A has severed the tree in order to such taking, he has
committed theft.
(b) A puts a bait for dogs in his pocket, and thus induces Z’s dog to follow it. Here, if A’s intention
be dishonestly to take the dog out of Z’s possession without Z’s consent. A has committed theft as soon
as Z’s dog has begun to follow A.
(c) A meets a bullock carrying a box of treasure. He drives the bullock in a certain direction, in order
that he may dishonestly take the treasure. As soon as the bullock begins to move, A has committed theft
of the treasure.
(d) A being Z’s servant, and entrusted by Z with the care of Z’s plate, dishonestly runs away with the
plate, without Z’s consent. A has committed theft.
(e) Z, going on a journey, entrusts his plate to A, the keeper of a warehouse, till Z shall return. A
carries the plate to a goldsmith and sells it. Here the plate was not in Z’s possession. It could not therefore
be taken out of Z’s possession, and A has not committed theft, though he may have committed criminal
breach of trust.
(f) A finds a ring belonging to Z on a table in the house which Z occupies. Here the ring is in Z’s
possession, and if A dishonestly removes it, A commits theft.
(g) A finds a ring lying on the highroad, not in the possession of any person. A, by taking it, commits
no theft, though he may commit criminal misappropriation of property.
(h) A sees a ring belonging to Z lying on a table in Z’s house. Not venturing to misappropriate the
ring immediately for fear of search and detection, A hides the ring in a place where it is highly
improbable that it will ever be found by Z, with the intention of taking the ring from the hiding place and
selling it when the loss is forgotten. Here A, at the time of first moving the ring, commits theft.
(i) A delivers his watch to Z, a jeweler, to be regulated. Z carries it to his shop. A, not owing to the
jeweler any debt for which the jeweler might lawfully detain the watch as a security, enters the shop
openly, takes his watch by force out of Z’s hand, and carries it away. Here A, though he may have
committed criminal trespass and assault, has not committed theft, in as much as what he did was not done
dishonestly.
89
(j) If A owes money to Z for repairing the watch, and if Z retains the watch lawfully as a security for
the debt, and A takes the watch out of Z’s possession, with the intention of depriving Z of the property as
a security for his debt, he commits theft, in as much as he takes it dishonestly.
(k) Again, if A, having pawned his watch to Z, takes it out of Z’s possession without Z’s consent, not
having paid what he borrowed on the watch, he commits theft, though the watch is his own property in as
much as he takes it dishonestly.
(l) A takes an article belonging to Z out of Z’s possession without Z’s consent, with the intention of
keeping it until he obtains money from Z as a reward for its restoration. Here A takes dishonestly; A has
therefore committed theft.
(m) A, being on friendly terms with Z, goes into Z’s library in Z’s absence, and takes away a book
without Z’s express consent for the purpose merely of reading it, and with the intention of returning it.
Here, it is probable that A may have conceived that he had Z’s implied consent to use Z’s book. If this
was A’s impression, A has not committed theft.
(n) A asks charity from Z’s wife. She gives A money, food and clothes, which A knows to belong to
Z her husband. Here it is probable that A may conceive that Z’s wife is authorised to give away alms. If
this was A’s impression, A has not committed theft.
(o) A is the paramour of Z’s wife. She gives a valuable property, which A knows to belong to her
husband Z, and to be such property as she has no authority from Z to give. If A takes the property
dishonestly, he commits theft.
(p) A, in good faith, believing property belonging to Z to be A’s own property, takes that property out
of Z’s possession. Here, as A does not take dishonestly, he does not commit theft.
(2) Whoever commits theft shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both and in case of second or subsequent
conviction of any person under this section, he shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term
which shall not be less than one year but which may extend to five years and with fine:
Provided that in cases of theft where the value of the stolen property is less than five thousand rupees,
and a person is convicted for the first time, shall upon return of the value of property or restoration of the
stolen property, shall be punished with community service.
304. Snatching.—(1) Theft is snatching if, in order to commit theft, the offender suddenly or quickly
or forcibly seizes or secures or grabs or takes away from any person or from his possession any movable
property.
(2) Whoever commits snatching, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine.
305. Theft in a dwelling house, or means of transportation or place of worship, etc.—Whoever
commits theft—
(a) in any building, tent or vessel used as a human dwelling or used for the custody of property;
or
(b) of any means of transport used for the transport of goods or passengers; or
(c) of any article or goods from any means of transport used for the transport of goods or
passengers; or
(d) of idol or icon in any place of worship; or
(e) of any property of the Government or of a local authority,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years,
and shall also be liable to fine.
306. Theft by clerk or servant of property in possession of master.—Whoever, being a clerk or
servant, or being employed in the capacity of a clerk or servant, commits theft in respect of any property
90
in the possession of his master or employer, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
307. Theft after preparation made for causing death, hurt or restraint in order to committing
of theft.—Whoever commits theft, having made preparation for causing death, or hurt, or restraint, or
fear of death, or of hurt, or of restraint, to any person, in order to the committing of such theft, or in order
to the effecting of his escape after the committing of such theft, or in order to the retaining of property
taken by such theft, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten
years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Illustrations.
(a) A commits theft on property in Z’s possession; and while committing this theft, he has a loaded
pistol under his garment, having provided this pistol for the purpose of hurting Z in case Z should resist.
A has committed the offence defined in this section.
(b) A picks Z’s pocket, having posted several of his companions near him, in order that they may
restrain Z, if Z should perceive what is passing and should resist, or should attempt to apprehend A. A
has committed the offence defined in this section.
Of extortion
308. Extortion.—(1) Whoever intentionally puts any person in fear of any injury to that person, or to
any other, and thereby dishonestly induces the person so put in fear to deliver to any person any property,
or valuable security or anything signed or sealed which may be converted into a valuable security,
commits extortion.
Illustrations.
(a) A threatens to publish a defamatory libel concerning Z unless Z gives him money. He thus
induces Z to give him money. A has committed extortion.
(b) A threatens Z that he will keep Z’s child in wrongful confinement, unless Z will sign and deliver
to A a promissory note binding Z to pay certain monies to A. Z signs and delivers the note. A has
committed extortion.
(c) A threatens to send club-men to plough up Z’s field unless Z will sign and deliver to B a bond
binding Z under a penalty to deliver certain produce to B, and thereby induces Z to sign and deliver the
bond. A has committed extortion.
(d) A, by putting Z in fear of grievous hurt, dishonestly induces Z to sign or affix his seal to a blank
paper and deliver it to A. Z signs and delivers the paper to A. Here, as the paper so signed may be
converted into a valuable security. A has committed extortion.
(e) A threatens Z by sending a message through an electronic device that “Your child is in my
possession, and will be put to death unless you send me one lakh rupees.” A thus induces Z to give him
money. A has committed extortion.
(2) Whoever commits extortion shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both.
(3) Whoever, in order to the committing of extortion, puts any person in fear, or attempts to put any
person in fear, of any injury, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
(4) Whoever, in order to the committing of extortion, puts or attempts to put any person in fear of
death or of grievous hurt to that person or to any other, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(5) Whoever commits extortion by putting any person in fear of death or of grievous hurt to that
person or to any other, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
91
(6) Whoever, in order to the committing of extortion, puts or attempts to put any person in fear of an
accusation, against that person or any other, of having committed, or attempted to commit, an offence
punishable with death or with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment for a term which may extend
to ten years, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(7) Whoever commits extortion by putting any person in fear of an accusation against that person or
any other, of having committed or attempted to commit any offence punishable with death, or with
imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, or of having
attempted to induce any other person to commit such offence, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Of robbery and dacoity
309. Robbery.—(1) In all robbery there is either theft or extortion.
(2) Theft is robbery if, in order to the committing of the theft, or in committing the theft, or in
carrying away or attempting to carry away property obtained by the theft, the offender, for that end
voluntarily causes or attempts to cause to any person death or hurt or wrongful restraint, or fear of instant
death or of instant hurt, or of instant wrongful restraint.
(3) Extortion is robbery if the offender, at the time of committing the extortion, is in the presence of
the person put in fear, and commits the extortion by putting that person in fear of instant death, of instant
hurt, or of instant wrongful restraint to that person or to some other person, and, by so putting in fear,
induces the person so put in fear then and there to deliver up the thing extorted.
Explanation.—The offender is said to be present if he is sufficiently near to put the other person in
fear of instant death, of instant hurt, or of instant wrongful restraint.
Illustrations.
(a) A holds Z down, and fraudulently takes Z’s money and jewels from Z’s clothes, without Z’s
consent. Here A has committed theft, and, in order to the committing of that theft, has voluntarily caused
wrongful restraint to Z. A has therefore committed robbery.
(b) A meets Z on the high road, shows a pistol, and demands Z’s purse. Z, in consequence, surrenders
his purse. Here A has extorted the purse from Z by putting him in fear of instant hurt, and being at the
time of committing the extortion in his presence. A has therefore committed robbery.
(c) A meets Z and Z’s child on the high road. A takes the child, and threatens to fling it down a
precipice, unless Z delivers his purse. Z, in consequence, delivers his purse. Here A has extorted the
purse from Z, by causing Z to be in fear of instant hurt to the child who is there present. A has therefore
committed robbery on Z.
(d) A obtains property from Z by saying—“Your child is in the hands of my gang, and will be put to
death unless you send us ten thousand rupees”. This is extortion, and punishable as such; but it is not
robbery, unless Z is put in fear of the instant death of his child.
(4) Whoever commits robbery shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may
extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine; and, if the robbery be committed on the highway
between sunset and sunrise, the imprisonment may be extended to fourteen years.
(5) Whoever attempts to commit robbery shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term
which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(6) If any person, in committing or in attempting to commit robbery, voluntarily causes hurt, such
person, and any other person jointly concerned in committing or attempting to commit such robbery, shall
be punished with imprisonment for life, or with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to
ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
310. Dacoity.—(1) When five or more persons conjointly commit or attempt to commit a robbery, or
where the whole number of persons conjointly committing or attempting to commit a robbery, and
92
persons present and aiding such commission or attempt, amount to five or more, every person so
committing, attempting or aiding, is said to commit dacoity.
(2) Whoever commits dacoity shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(3) If any one of five or more persons, who are conjointly committing dacoity, commits murder in so
committing dacoity, every one of those persons shall be punished with death, or imprisonment for life, or
rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(4) Whoever makes any preparation for committing dacoity, shall be punished with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(5) Whoever is one of five or more persons assembled for the purpose of committing dacoity, shall be
punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable
to fine.
(6) Whoever belongs to a gang of persons associated for the purpose of habitually committing
dacoity, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with rigorous imprisonment for a term which
may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
311. Robbery, or dacoity, with attempt to cause death or grievous hurt.—If, at the time of
committing robbery or dacoity, the offender uses any deadly weapon, or causes grievous hurt to any
person, or attempts to cause death or grievous hurt to any person, the imprisonment with which such
offender shall be punished shall not be less than seven years.
312. Attempt to commit robbery or dacoity when armed with deadly weapon.—If, at the time of
attempting to commit robbery or dacoity, the offender is armed with any deadly weapon, the
imprisonment with which such offender shall be punished shall not be less than seven years.
313. Punishment for belonging to gang of robbers, etc.—Whoever belongs to any gang of persons
associated in habitually committing theft or robbery, and not being a gang of dacoits, shall be punished
with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Of criminal misappropriation of property
314. Dishonest misappropriation of property.—Whoever dishonestly misappropriates or converts
to his own use any movable property, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which shall not be less than six months but which may extend to two years and with fine.
Illustrations.
(a) A takes property belonging to Z out of Z’s possession, in good faith believing at the time when he
takes it, that the property belongs to himself. A is not guilty of theft; but if A, after discovering his
mistake, dishonestly appropriates the property to his own use, he is guilty of an offence under this
section.
(b) A, being on friendly terms with Z, goes into Z’s library in Z’s absence, and takes away a book
without Z’s express consent. Here, if A was under the impression that he had Z’s implied consent to take
the book for the purpose of reading it, A has not committed theft. But, if A afterwards sells the book for
his own benefit, he is guilty of an offence under this section.
(c) A and B, being, joint owners of a horse. A takes the horse out of B’s possession, intending to use
it. Here, as A has a right to use the horse, he does not dishonestly misappropriate it. But, if A sells the
horse and appropriates the whole proceeds to his own use, he is guilty of an offence under this section.
Explanation 1.—A dishonest misappropriation for a time only is a misappropriation within the
meaning of this section.
93
Illustration.
A finds a Government promissory note belonging to Z, bearing a blank endorsement. A, knowing that
the note belongs to Z, pledges it with a banker as a security for a loan, intending at a future time to restore
it to Z. A has committed an offence under this section.
Explanation 2.—A person who finds property not in the possession of any other person, and takes
such property for the purpose of protecting it for, or of restoring it to, the owner, does not take or
misappropriate it dishonestly, and is not guilty of an offence; but he is guilty of the offence above
defined, if he appropriates it to his own use, when he knows or has the means of discovering the owner,
or before he has used reasonable means to discover and give notice to the owner and has kept the
property a reasonable time to enable the owner to claim it.
What are reasonable means or what is a reasonable time in such a case, is a question of fact.
It is not necessary that the finder should know who is the owner of the property, or that any particular
person is the owner of it; it is sufficient if, at the time of appropriating it, he does not believe it to be his
own property, or in good faith believe that the real owner cannot be found.
Illustrations.
(a) A finds a rupee on the high road, not knowing to whom the rupee belongs, A picks up the rupee.
Here A has not committed the offence defined in this section.
(b) A finds a letter on the road, containing a bank-note. From the direction and contents of the letter
he learns to whom the note belongs. He appropriates the note. He is guilty of an offence under this
section.
(c) A finds a cheque payable to bearer. He can form no conjecture as to the person who has lost the
cheque. But the name of the person, who has drawn the cheque, appears. A knows that this person can
direct him to the person in whose favour the cheque was drawn. A appropriates the cheque without
attempting to discover the owner. He is guilty of an offence under this section.
(d) A sees Z drop his purse with money in it. A picks up the purse with the intention of restoring it
to Z, but afterwards appropriates it to his own use. A has committed an offence under this section.
(e) A finds a purse with money, not knowing to whom it belongs; he afterwards discovers that it
belongs to Z, and appropriates it to his own use. A is guilty of an offence under this section.
(f) A finds a valuable ring, not knowing to whom it belongs. A sells it immediately without
attempting to discover the owner. A is guilty of an offence under this section.
315. Dishonest misappropriation of property possessed by deceased person at the time of his
death.—Whoever dishonestly misappropriates or converts to his own use any property, knowing that
such property was in the possession of a deceased person at the time of that person’s decease, and has not
since been in the possession of any person legally entitled to such possession, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to
fine, and if the offender at the time of such person’s decease was employed by him as a clerk or servant,
the imprisonment may extend to seven years.
Illustration.
Z dies in possession of furniture and money. His servant A, before the money comes into the
possession of any person entitled to such possession, dishonestly misappropriates it. A has committed the
offence defined in this section.
316. Criminal breach of trust.—(1) Whoever, being in any manner entrusted with property, or with
any dominion over property, dishonestly misappropriates or converts to his own use that property, or
dishonestly uses or disposes of that property in violation of any direction of law prescribing the mode in
which such trust is to be discharged, or of any legal contract, express or implied, which he has made
touching the discharge of such trust, or wilfully suffers any other person so to do, commits criminal
breach of trust.
94
Explanation 1.—A person, being an employer of an establishment whether exempted under
section 17 of the Employees’ Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 (19 of 1952) or
not who deducts the employee’s contribution from the wages payable to the employee for credit to a
Provident Fund or Family Pension Fund established by any law for the time being in force, shall be
deemed to have been entrusted with the amount of the contribution so deducted by him and if he makes
default in the payment of such contribution to the said Fund in violation of the said law, shall be deemed
to have dishonestly used the amount of the said contribution in violation of a direction of law as
aforesaid.
Explanation 2.—A person, being an employer, who deducts the employees’ contribution from the
wages payable to the employee for credit to the Employees’ State Insurance Fund held and administered
by the Employees’ State Insurance Corporation established under the Employees’ State Insurance
Act, 1948 (34 of 1948) shall be deemed to have been entrusted with the amount of the contribution so
deducted by him and if he makes default in the payment of such contribution to the said Fund in violation
of the said Act, shall be deemed to have dishonestly used the amount of the said contribution in violation
of a direction of law as aforesaid.
Illustrations.
(a) A, being executor to the will of a deceased person, dishonestly disobeys the law which directs
him to divide the effects according to the will, and appropriates them to his own use. A has committed
criminal breach of trust.
(b) A is a warehouse-keeper Z going on a journey, entrusts his furniture to A, under a contract that it
shall be returned on payment of a stipulated sum for warehouse room. A dishonestly sells the goods. A
has committed criminal breach of trust.
(c) A, residing in Kolkata, is agent for Z, residing at Delhi. There is an express or implied contract
between A and Z, that all sums remitted by Z to A shall be invested by A, according to Z’s direction. Z
remits one lakh of rupees to A, with directions to A to invest the same in Company’s paper. A dishonestly
disobeys the directions and employs the money in his own business. A has committed criminal breach of
trust.
(d) But if A, in illustration (c), not dishonestly but in good faith, believing that it will be more for Z’s
advantage to hold shares in the Bank of Bengal, disobeys Z’s directions, and buys shares in the Bank of
Bengal, for Z, instead of buying Company’s paper, here, though Z should suffer loss, and should be
entitled to bring a civil action against A, on account of that loss, yet A, not having acted dishonestly, has
not committed criminal breach of trust.
(e) A, a revenue-officer, is entrusted with public money and is either directed by law, or bound by a
contract, express or implied, with the Government, to pay into a certain treasury all the public money
which he holds. A dishonestly appropriates the money. A has committed criminal breach of trust.
(f) A, a carrier, is entrusted by Z with property to be carried by land or by water. A dishonestly
misappropriates the property. A has committed criminal breach of trust.
(2) Whoever commits criminal breach of trust shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine, or with both.
(3) Whoever, being entrusted with property as a carrier, wharfinger or warehouse-keeper, commits
criminal breach of trust in respect of such property, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(4) Whoever, being a clerk or servant or employed as a clerk or servant, and being in any manner
entrusted in such capacity with property, or with any dominion over property, commits criminal breach of
trust in respect of that property, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(5) Whoever, being in any manner entrusted with property, or with any dominion over property in his
capacity of a public servant or in the way of his business as a banker, merchant, factor, broker, attorney or
agent commits criminal breach of trust in respect of that property, shall be punished with imprisonment
95
for life, or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall
also be liable to fine.
Of receiving stolen property
317. Stolen property.—(1) Property, the possession whereof has been transferred by theft or
extortion or robbery or cheating, and property which has been criminally misappropriated or in respect of
which criminal breach of trust has been committed, is designated as stolen property, whether the transfer
has been made, or the misappropriation or breach of trust has been committed, within or without India,
but, if such property subsequently comes into the possession of a person legally entitled to the possession
thereof, it then ceases to be stolen property.
(2) Whoever dishonestly receives or retains any stolen property, knowing or having reason to believe
the same to be stolen property, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
(3) Whoever dishonestly receives or retains any stolen property, the possession whereof he knows or
has reason to believe to have been transferred by the commission of dacoity, or dishonestly receives from
a person, whom he knows or has reason to believe to belong or to have belonged to a gang of dacoits,
property which he knows or has reason to believe to have been stolen, shall be punished with
imprisonment for life, or with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall
also be liable to fine.
(4) Whoever habitually receives or deals in property which he knows or has reason to believe to be
stolen property, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(5) Whoever voluntarily assists in concealing or disposing of or making away with property which he
knows or has reason to believe to be stolen property, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
Of cheating
318. Cheating.—(1) Whoever, by deceiving any person, fraudulently or dishonestly induces the
person so deceived to deliver any property to any person, or to consent that any person shall retain any
property, or intentionally induces the person so deceived to do or omit to do anything which he would not
do or omit if he were not so deceived, and which act or omission causes or is likely to cause damage or
harm to that person in body, mind, reputation or property, is said to cheat.
Explanation.—A dishonest concealment of facts is a deception within the meaning of this section.
Illustrations.
(a) A, by falsely pretending to be in the Civil Service, intentionally deceives Z, and thus dishonestly
induces Z to let him have on credit goods for which he does not mean to pay. A cheats.
(b) A, by putting a counterfeit mark on an article, intentionally deceives Z into a belief that this
article was made by a certain celebrated manufacturer, and thus dishonestly induces Z to buy and pay for
the article. A cheats.
(c) A, by exhibiting to Z a false sample of an article intentionally deceives Z into believing that the
article corresponds with the sample, and thereby dishonestly induces Z to buy and pay for the article. A
cheats.
(d) A, by tendering in payment for an article a bill on a house with which A keeps no money, and by
which A expects that the bill will be dishonoured, intentionally deceives Z, and thereby dishonestly
induces Z to deliver the article, intending not to pay for it. A cheats.
(e) A, by pledging as diamonds articles which he knows are not diamonds, intentionally deceives Z,
and thereby dishonestly induces Z to lend money. A cheats.
(f) A intentionally deceives Z into a belief that A means to repay any money that Z may lend to him
and thereby dishonestly induces Z to lend him money, A not intending to repay it. A cheats.
96
(g) A intentionally deceives Z into a belief that A means to deliver to Z a certain quantity of indigo
plant which he does not intend to deliver, and thereby dishonestly induces Z to advance money upon the
faith of such delivery. A cheats; but if A, at the time of obtaining the money, intends to deliver the indigo
plant, and afterwards breaks his contract and does not deliver it, he does not cheat, but is liable only to a
civil action for breach of contract.
(h) A intentionally deceives Z into a belief that A has performed A’s part of a contract made with Z,
which he has not performed, and thereby dishonestly induces Z to pay money. A cheats.
(i) A sells and conveys an estate to B. A, knowing that in consequence of such sale he has no right to
the property, sells or mortgages the same to Z, without disclosing the fact of the previous sale and
conveyance to B, and receives the purchase or mortgage money from Z. A cheats.
(2) Whoever cheats shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
(3) Whoever cheats with the knowledge that he is likely thereby to cause wrongful loss to a person
whose interest in the transaction to which the cheating relates, he was bound, either by law, or by a legal
contract, to protect, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to five years, or with fine, or with both.
(4) Whoever cheats and thereby dishonestly induces the person deceived to deliver any property to
any person, or to make, alter or destroy the whole or any part of a valuable security, or anything which is
signed or sealed, and which is capable of being converted into a valuable security, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to
fine.
319. Cheating by personation.—(1) A person is said to cheat by personation if he cheats by
pretending to be some other person, or by knowingly substituting one person for or another, or
representing that he or any other person is a person other than he or such other person really is.
Explanation.—The offence is committed whether the individual personated is a real or imaginary
person.
Illustrations.
(a) A cheats by pretending to be a certain rich banker of the same name. A cheats by personation.
(b) A cheats by pretending to be B, a person who is deceased. A cheats by personation.
(2) Whoever cheats by personation shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to five years, or with fine, or with both.
Of fraudulent deeds and dispositions of property
320. Dishonest or fraudulent removal or concealment of property to prevent distribution
among creditors.—Whoever dishonestly or fraudulently removes, conceals or delivers to any person, or
transfers or causes to be transferred to any person, without adequate consideration, any property,
intending thereby to prevent, or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby prevent, the distribution of
that property according to law among his creditors or the creditors of any other person, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than six months but which may
extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
321. Dishonestly or fraudulently preventing debt being available for creditors.—Whoever
dishonestly or fraudulently prevents any debt or demand due to himself or to any other person from being
made available according to law for payment of his debts or the debts of such other person, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine,
or with both.
322. Dishonest or fraudulent execution of deed of transfer containing false statement of
consideration.—Whoever dishonestly or fraudulently signs, executes or becomes a party to any deed or
instrument which purports to transfer or subject to any charge any property, or any interest therein, and
which contains any false statement relating to the consideration for such transfer or charge, or relating to
97
the person or persons for whose use or benefit it is really intended to operate, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
323. Dishonest or fraudulent removal or concealment of property.—Whoever dishonestly or
fraudulently conceals or removes any property of himself or any other person, or dishonestly or
fraudulently assists in the concealment or removal thereof, or dishonestly releases any demand or claim
to which he is entitled, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
Of mischief
324. Mischief.—(1) Whoever with intent to cause, or knowing that he is likely to cause, wrongful
loss or damage to the public or to any person, causes the destruction of any property, or any such change
in any property or in the situation thereof as destroys or diminishes its value or utility, or affects it
injuriously, commits mischief.
Explanation 1.—It is not essential to the offence of mischief that the offender should intend to cause
loss or damage to the owner of the property injured or destroyed. It is sufficient if he intends to cause, or
knows that he is likely to cause, wrongful loss or damage to any person by injuring any property, whether
it belongs to that person or not.
Explanation 2.—Mischief may be committed by an act affecting property belonging to the person
who commits the act, or to that person and others jointly.
Illustrations.
(a) A voluntarily burns a valuable security belonging to Z intending to cause wrongful loss to Z. A
has committed mischief.
(b) A introduces water into an ice-house belonging to Z and thus causes the ice to melt, intending
wrongful loss to Z. A has committed mischief.
(c) A voluntarily throws into a river a ring belonging to Z, with the intention of thereby causing
wrongful loss to Z. A has committed mischief.
(d) A, knowing that his effects are about to be taken in execution in order to satisfy a debt due from
him to Z, destroys those effects, with the intention of thereby preventing Z from obtaining satisfaction of
the debt, and of thus causing damage to Z. A has committed mischief.
(e) A having insured a ship, voluntarily causes the same to be cast away, with the intention of causing
damage to the underwriters. A has committed mischief.
(f) A causes a ship to be cast away, intending thereby to cause damage to Z who has lent money on
bottomry on the ship. A has committed mischief.
(g) A, having joint property with Z in a horse, shoots the horse, intending thereby to cause wrongful
loss to Z. A has committed mischief.
(h) A causes cattle to enter upon a field belonging to Z, intending to cause and knowing that he is
likely to cause damage to Z’s crop. A has committed mischief.
(2) Whoever commits mischief shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.
(3) Whoever commits mischief and thereby causes loss or damage to any property including the
property of Government or Local Authority shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.
(4) Whoever commits mischief and thereby causes loss or damage to the amount of twenty thousand
rupees and more but less than one lakh rupees shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
98
(5) Whoever commits mischief and thereby causes loss or damage to the amount of one lakh rupees
or upwards, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
five years, or with fine, or with both.
(6) Whoever commits mischief, having made preparation for causing to any person death, or hurt, or
wrongful restraint, or fear of death, or of hurt, or of wrongful restraint, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five years, and shall also be liable to
fine.
325. Mischief by killing or maiming animal.—Whoever commits mischief by killing, poisoning,
maiming or rendering useless any animal shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to five years, or with fine, or with both.
326. Mischief by injury, inundation, fire or explosive substance, etc.—Whoever commits
mischief by,—
(a) doing any act which causes, or which he knows to be likely to cause, a diminution of the
supply of water for agricultural purposes, or for food or drink for human beings or for animals which
are property, or for cleanliness or for carrying on any manufacture, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine, or with
both;
(b) doing any act which renders or which he knows to be likely to render any public road, bridge,
navigable river or navigable channel, natural or artificial, impassable or less safe for travelling or
conveying property, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to five years, or with fine, or with both;
(c) doing any act which causes or which he knows to be likely to cause an inundation or an
obstruction to any public drainage attended with injury or damage, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine, or with
both;
(d) destroying or moving any sign or signal used for navigation of rail, aircraft or ship or other
thing placed as a guide for navigators, or by any act which renders any such sign or signal less useful
as a guide for navigators, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both;
(e) destroying or moving any land-mark fixed by the authority of a public servant, or by any act
which renders such land-mark less useful as such, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both;
(f) fire or any explosive substance intending to cause, or knowing it to be likely that he will
thereby cause, damage to any property including agricultural produce, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be
liable to fine;
(g) fire or any explosive substance, intending to cause, or knowing it to be likely that he will
thereby cause, the destruction of any building which is ordinarily used as a place of worship or as a
human dwelling or as a place for the custody of property, shall be punished with imprisonment for
life, or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall
also be liable to fine.
327. Mischief with intent to destroy or make unsafe a rail, aircraft, decked vessel or one of
twenty tons burden.—(1) Whoever commits mischief to any rail, aircraft, or a decked vessel or any
vessel of a burden of twenty tons or upwards, intending to destroy or render unsafe, or knowing it to be
likely that he will thereby destroy or render unsafe, that rail, aircraft or vessel, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to
fine.
99
(2) Whoever commits, or attempts to commit, by fire or any explosive substance, such mischief as is
described in sub-section (1), shall be punished with imprisonment for life or with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
328. Punishment for intentionally running vessel aground or ashore with intent to commit
theft, etc.—Whoever intentionally runs any vessel aground or ashore, intending to commit theft of any
property contained therein or to dishonestly misappropriate any such property, or with intent that such
theft or misappropriation of property may be committed, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Of criminal trespass
329. Criminal trespass and house-trespass.—(1) Whoever enters into or upon property in the
possession of another with intent to commit an offence or to intimidate, insult or annoy any person in
possession of such property or having lawfully entered into or upon such property, unlawfully remains
there with intent thereby to intimidate, insult or annoy any such person or with intent to commit an
offence is said to commit criminal trespass.
(2) Whoever commits criminal trespass by entering into or remaining in any building, tent or vessel
used as a human dwelling or any building used as a place for worship, or as a place for the custody of
property, is said to commit house-trespass.
Explanation.—The introduction of any part of the criminal trespasser’s body is entering sufficient to
constitute house-trespass.
(3) Whoever commits criminal trespass shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with
both.
(4) Whoever commits house-trespass shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
330. House-trespass and house-breaking.—(1) Whoever commits house-trespass having taken
precautions to conceal such house-trespass from some person who has a right to exclude or eject the
trespasser from the building, tent or vessel which is the subject of the trespass, is said to commit lurking
house-trespass.
(2) A person is said to commit house-breaking who commits house-trespass if he effects his entrance
into the house or any part of it in any of the six ways hereinafter described; or if, being in the house or
any part of it for the purpose of committing an offence, or having committed an offence therein, he quits
the house or any part of it in any of the following ways, namely:—
(a) if he enters or quits through a passage made by himself, or by any abettor of the housetrespass, in order to the committing of the house-trespass;
(b) if he enters or quits through any passage not intended by any person, other than himself or an
abettor of the offence, for human entrance; or through any passage to which he has obtained access
by scaling or climbing over any wall or building;
(c) if he enters or quits through any passage which he or any abettor of the house-trespass has
opened, in order to the committing of the house-trespass by any means by which that passage was not
intended by the occupier of the house to be opened;
(d) if he enters or quits by opening any lock in order to the committing of the house-trespass, or
in order to the quitting of the house after a house-trespass;
(e) if he effects his entrance or departure by using criminal force or committing an assault, or by
threatening any person with assault;
(f) if he enters or quits by any passage which he knows to have been fastened against such
entrance or departure, and to have been unfastened by himself or by an abettor of the house-trespass.
100
Explanation.—Any out-house or building occupied with a house, and between which and such house
there is an immediate internal communication, is part of the house within the meaning of this section.
Illustrations.
(a) A commits house-trespass by making a hole through the wall of Z’s house, and putting his hand
through the aperture. This is house-breaking.
(b) A commits house-trespass by creeping into a ship at a port-hole between decks. This is
house-breaking.
(c) A commits house-trespass by entering Z’s house through a window. This is house-breaking.
(d) A commits house-trespass by entering Z’s house through the door, having opened a door which
was fastened. This is house-breaking.
(e) A commits house-trespass by entering Z’s house through the door, having lifted a latch by putting
a wire through a hole in the door. This is house-breaking.
(f) A finds the key of Z’s house door, which Z had lost, and commits house-trespass by entering Z’s
house, having opened the door with that key. This is house-breaking.
(g) Z is standing in his doorway. A forces a passage by knocking Z down, and commits housetrespass by entering the house. This is house-breaking.
(h) Z, the door-keeper of Y, is standing in Y’s doorway. A commits house-trespass by entering the
house, having deterred Z from opposing him by threatening to beat him. This is house-breaking.
331. Punishment for house-trespass or house-breaking.—(1) Whoever commits lurking housetrespass or house-breaking, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to two years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(2) Whoever commits lurking house-trespass or house-breaking after sunset and before sunrise, shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, and
shall also be liable to fine.
(3) Whoever commits lurking house-trespass or house-breaking, in order to the committing of any
offence punishable with imprisonment, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine; and if the offence intended to be
committed is theft, the term of the imprisonment may be extended to ten years.
(4) Whoever commits lurking house-trespass or house-breaking after sunset and before sunrise, in
order to the committing of any offence punishable with imprisonment, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five years, and shall also be liable to
fine; and, if the offence intended to be committed is theft, the term of the imprisonment may be extended
to fourteen years.
(5) Whoever commits lurking house-trespass, or house-breaking, having made preparation for
causing hurt to any person, or for assaulting any person, or for wrongfully restraining any person, or for
putting any person in fear of hurt or of assault or of wrongful restraint, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description or a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to
fine.
(6) Whoever commits lurking house-trespass or house-breaking after sunset and before sunrise,
having made preparation for causing hurt to any person or for assaulting any person, or for wrongfully
restraining any person, or for putting any person in fear of hurt, or of assault, or of wrongful restraint,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to fourteen years,
and shall also be liable to fine.
(7) Whoever, whilst committing lurking house-trespass or house-breaking, causes grievous hurt to
any person or attempts to cause death or grievous hurt to any person, shall be punished with
imprisonment for life, or imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years,
and shall also be liable to fine.
101
(8) If, at the time of the committing of lurking house-trespass or house-breaking after sunset and
before sunrise, any person guilty of such offence shall voluntarily cause or attempt to cause death or
grievous hurt to any person, every person jointly concerned in committing such lurking house-trespass or
house-breaking after sunset and before sunrise, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to
fine.
332. House-trespass in order to commit offence.—Whoever commits house-trespass in order to the
committing of any offence—
(a) punishable with death, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with rigorous
imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years, and shall also be liable to fine;
(b) punishable with imprisonment for life, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term not exceeding ten years, and shall also be liable to fine;
(c) punishable with imprisonment, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to two years, and shall also be liable to fine:
Provided that if the offence intended to be committed is theft, the term of the imprisonment may be
extended to seven years.
333. House-trespass after preparation for hurt, assault or wrongful restraint.—Whoever
commits house-trespass, having made preparation for causing hurt to any person or for assaulting any
person, or for wrongfully restraining any person, or for putting any person in fear of hurt, or of assault, or
of wrongful restraint, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
334. Dishonestly breaking open receptacle containing property.—(1) Whoever dishonestly or
with intent to commit mischief, breaks open or unfastens any closed receptacle which contains or which
he believes to contain property, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
(2) Whoever, being entrusted with any closed receptacle which contains or which he believes to
contain property, without having authority to open the same, dishonestly, or with intent to commit
mischief, breaks open or unfastens that receptacle, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
CHAPTER XVIII
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO DOCUMENTS AND TO PROPERTY MARKS
335. Making a false document.—A person is said to make a false document or false electronic
record—
(A) Who dishonestly or fraudulently—
(i) makes, signs, seals or executes a document or part of a document;
(ii) makes or transmits any electronic record or part of any electronic record;
(iii) affixes any electronic signature on any electronic record;
(iv) makes any mark denoting the execution of a document or the authenticity of the
electronic signature,
with the intention of causing it to be believed that such document or part of document, electronic
record or electronic signature was made, signed, sealed, executed, transmitted or affixed by or by the
authority of a person by whom or by whose authority he knows that it was not made, signed, sealed,
executed or affixed; or
(B) Who without lawful authority, dishonestly or fraudulently, by cancellation or otherwise,
alters a document or an electronic record in any material part thereof, after it has been made, executed
102
or affixed with electronic signature either by himself or by any other person, whether such person be
living or dead at the time of such alteration; or
(C) Who dishonestly or fraudulently causes any person to sign, seal, execute or alter a document
or an electronic record or to affix his electronic signature on any electronic record knowing that such
person by reason of unsoundness of mind or intoxication cannot, or that by reason of deception
practised upon him, he does not know the contents of the document or electronic record or the nature
of the alteration.
Illustrations.
(a) A has a letter of credit upon B for rupees 10,000, written by Z. A, in order to defraud B, adds
cipher to the 10,000, and makes the sum 1,00,000 intending that it may be believed by B that Z so wrote
the letter. A has committed forgery.
(b) A, without Z’s authority, affixes Z’s seal to a document purporting to be a conveyance of an
estate from Z to A, with the intention of selling the estate to B and thereby of obtaining from B the
purchase-money. A has committed forgery.
(c) A picks up a cheque on a banker signed by B, payable to bearer, but without any sum having been
inserted in the cheque. A fraudulently fills up the cheque by inserting the sum of ten thousand rupees. A
commits forgery.
(d) A leaves with B, his agent, a cheque on a banker, signed by A, without inserting the sum payable
and authorises B to fill up the cheque by inserting a sum not exceeding ten thousand rupees for the
purpose of making certain payments. B fraudulently fills up the cheque by inserting the sum of
twenty thousand rupees. B commits forgery.
(e) A draws a bill of exchange on himself in the name of B without B’s authority, intending to
discount it as a genuine bill with a banker and intending to take up the bill on its maturity. Here, as A
draws the bill with intent to deceive the banker by leading him to suppose that he had the security of B,
and thereby to discount the bill, A is guilty of forgery.
(f) Z’s will contains these words—“I direct that all my remaining property be equally divided
between A, B and C.” A dishonestly scratches out B’s name, intending that it may be believed that the
whole was left to himself and C. A has committed forgery.
(g) A endorses a Government promissory note and makes it payable to Z or his order by writing on
the bill the words “Pay to Z or his order” and signing the endorsement. B dishonestly erases the words
“Pay to Z or his order”, and thereby converts the special endorsement into a blank endorsement. B
commits forgery.
(h) A sells and conveys an estate to Z. A afterwards, in order to defraud Z of his estate, executes a
conveyance of the same estate to B, dated six months earlier than the date of the conveyance to Z,
intending it to be believed that he had conveyed the estate to B before he conveyed it to Z. A has
committed forgery.
(i) Z dictates his will to A. A intentionally writes down a different legatee from the legatee named
by Z, and by representing to Z that he has prepared the will according to his instructions, induces Z to
sign the will. A has committed forgery.
(j) A writes a letter and signs it with B’s name without B’s authority, certifying that A is a man of
good character and in distressed circumstances from unforeseen misfortune, intending by means of such
letter to obtain alms from Z and other persons. Here, as A made a false document in order to induce Z to
part with property, A has committed forgery.
(k) A without B’s authority writes a letter and signs it in B’s name certifying to A’s character,
intending thereby to obtain employment under Z. A has committed forgery in as much as he intended to
deceive Z by the forged certificate, and thereby to induce Z to enter into an express or implied contract
for service.
Explanation 1.—A man’s signature of his own name may amount to forgery.
103
Illustrations.
(a) A signs his own name to a bill of exchange, intending that it may be believed that the bill was
drawn by another person of the same name. A has committed forgery.
(b) A writes the word “accepted” on a piece of paper and signs it with Z’s name, in order that B may
afterwards write on the paper a bill of exchange drawn by B upon Z, and negotiate the bill as though it
had been accepted by Z. A is guilty of forgery; and if B, knowing the fact, draws the bill upon the paper
pursuant to A’s intention, B is also guilty of forgery.
(c) A picks up a bill of exchange payable to the order of a different person of the same name. A
endorses the bill in his own name, intending to cause it to be believed that it was endorsed by the person
to whose order it was payable; here A has committed forgery.
(d) A purchases an estate sold under execution of a decree against B. B, after the seizure of the estate,
in collusion with Z, executes a lease of the estate, to Z at a nominal rent and for a long period and dates
the lease six months prior to the seizure, with intent to defraud A, and to cause it to be believed that the
lease was granted before the seizure. B, though he executes the lease in his own name, commits forgery
by antedating it.
(e) A, a trader, in anticipation of insolvency, lodges effects with B for A’s benefit, and with intent to
defraud his creditors; and in order to give a colour to the transaction, writes a promissory note binding
himself to pay to B a sum for value received, and antedates the note, intending that it may be believed to
have been made before A was on the point of insolvency. A has committed forgery under the first head of
the definition.
Explanation 2.—The making of a false document in the name of a fictitious person, intending it to be
believed that the document was made by a real person, or in the name of a deceased person, intending it
to be believed that the document was made by the person in his lifetime, may amount to forgery.
Illustration.
A draws a bill of exchange upon a fictitious person, and fraudulently accepts the bill in the name of
such fictitious person with intent to negotiate it. A commits forgery.
Explanation 3.—For the purposes of this section, the expression “affixing electronic signature” shall
have the meaning assigned to it in clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Information
Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000).
336. Forgery.—(1) Whoever makes any false document or false electronic record or part of a
document or electronic record, with intent to cause damage or injury, to the public or to any person, or to
support any claim or title, or to cause any person to part with property, or to enter into any express or
implied contract, or with intent to commit fraud or that fraud may be committed, commits forgery.
(2) Whoever commits forgery shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
(3) Whoever commits forgery, intending that the document or electronic record forged shall be used
for the purpose of cheating, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(4) Whoever commits forgery, intending that the document or electronic record forged shall harm the
reputation of any party, or knowing that it is likely to be used for that purpose, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to
fine.
337. Forgery of record of Court or of public register, etc.—Whoever forges a document or an
electronic record, purporting to be a record or proceeding of or in a Court or an identity document issued
by Government including voter identity card or Aadhaar Card, or a register of birth, marriage or burial, or
a register kept by a public servant as such, or a certificate or document purporting to be made by a public
servant in his official capacity, or an authority to institute or defend a suit, or to take any proceedings
104
therein, or to confess judgment, or a power of attorney, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “register” includes any list, data or record of any
entries maintained in the electronic form as defined in clause (r) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the
Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000).
338. Forgery of valuable security, will, etc.—Whoever forges a document which purports to be a
valuable security or a will, or an authority to adopt a son, or which purports to give authority to any
person to make or transfer any valuable security, or to receive the principal, interest or dividends thereon,
or to receive or deliver any money, movable property, or valuable security, or any document purporting
to be an acquittance or receipt acknowledging the payment of money, or an acquittance or receipt for the
delivery of any movable property or valuable security, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable
to fine.
339. Having possession of document described in section 337 or section 338, knowing it to be
forged and intending to use it as genuine.—Whoever has in his possession any document or electronic
record, knowing the same to be forged and intending that the same shall fraudulently or dishonestly be
used as genuine, shall, if the document or electronic record is one of the description mentioned in section
337 of this Sanhita, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine; and if the document is one of the description mentioned in
section 338, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either description, for
a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
340. Forged document or electronic record and using it as genuine.—(1) A false document or
electronic record made wholly or in part by forgery is designated a forged document or electronic record.
(2) Whoever fraudulently or dishonestly uses as genuine any document or electronic record which he
knows or has reason to believe to be a forged document or electronic record, shall be punished in the
same manner as if he had forged such document or electronic record.
341. Making or possessing counterfeit seal, etc., with intent to commit forgery punishable under
section 338.—(1) Whoever makes or counterfeits any seal, plate or other instrument for making an
impression, intending that the same shall be used for the purpose of committing any forgery which would
be punishable under section 338 of this Sanhita, or, with such intent, has in his possession any such seal,
plate or other instrument, knowing the same to be counterfeit, shall be punished with imprisonment for
life, or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall
also be liable to fine.
(2) Whoever makes or counterfeits any seal, plate or other instrument for making an impression,
intending that the same shall be used for the purpose of committing any forgery which would be
punishable under any section of this Chapter other than section 338, or, with such intent, has in his
possession any such seal, plate or other instrument, knowing the same to be counterfeit, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be
liable to fine.
(3) Whoever possesses any seal, plate or other instrument knowing the same to be counterfeit, shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, and
shall also be liable to fine.
(4) Whoever fraudulently or dishonestly uses as genuine any seal, plate or other instrument knowing
or having reason to believe the same to be counterfeit, shall be punished in the same manner as if he had
made or counterfeited such seal, plate or other instrument.
342. Counterfeiting device or mark used for authenticating documents described in section 338,
or possessing counterfeit marked material.—(1) Whoever counterfeits upon, or in the substance of,
any material, any device or mark used for the purpose of authenticating any document described in
section 338, intending that such device or mark shall be used for the purpose of giving the appearance of
authenticity to any document then forged or thereafter to be forged on such material, or who, with such
105
intent, has in his possession any material upon or in the substance of which any such device or mark has
been counterfeited, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(2) Whoever counterfeits upon, or in the substance of, any material, any device or mark used for the
purpose of authenticating any document or electronic record other than the documents described in
section 338, intending that such device or mark shall be used for the purpose of giving the appearance of
authenticity to any document then forged or thereafter to be forged on such material, or who with such
intent, has in his possession any material upon or in the substance of which any such device or mark has
been counterfeited, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
343. Fraudulent cancellation, destruction, etc., of will, authority to adopt, or valuable
security.—Whoever fraudulently or dishonestly, or with intent to cause damage or injury to the public or
to any person, cancels, destroys or defaces, or attempts to cancel, destroy or deface, or secretes or
attempts to secrete any document which is or purports to be a will, or an authority to adopt a son, or any
valuable security, or commits mischief in respect of such document, shall be punished with imprisonment
for life, or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall
also be liable to fine.
344. Falsification of accounts.—Whoever, being a clerk, officer or servant, or employed or acting in
the capacity of a clerk, officer or servant, wilfully, and with intent to defraud, destroys, alters, mutilates
or falsifies any book, electronic record, paper, writing, valuable security or account which belongs to or is
in the possession of his employer, or has been received by him for or on behalf of his employer, or
wilfully, and with intent to defraud, makes or abets the making of any false entry in, or omits or alters or
abets the omission or alteration of any material particular from or in, any such book, electronic record,
paper, writing, valuable security or account, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both.
Explanation.—It shall be sufficient in any charge under this section to allege a general intent to
defraud without naming any particular person intended to be defrauded or specifying any particular sum
of money intended to be the subject of the fraud, or any particular day on which the offence was
committed.
Of property marks
345. Property mark.—(1) A mark used for denoting that movable property belongs to a particular
person is called a property mark.
(2) Whoever marks any movable property or goods or any case, package or other receptacle
containing movable property or goods, or uses any case, package or other receptacle having any mark
thereon, in a manner reasonably calculated to cause it to be believed that the property or goods so
marked, or any property or goods contained in any such receptacle so marked, belong to a person to
whom they do not belong, is said to use a false property mark.
(3) Whoever uses any false property mark shall, unless he proves that he acted without intent to
defraud, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or
with fine, or with both.
346. Tampering with property mark with intent to cause injury.—Whoever removes, destroys,
defaces or adds to any property mark, intending or knowing it to be likely that he may thereby cause
injury to any person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.
347. Counterfeiting a property mark.—(1) Whoever counterfeits any property mark used by any
other person shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
two years, or with fine, or with both.
(2) Whoever counterfeits any property mark used by a public servant, or any mark used by a public
servant to denote that any property has been manufactured by a particular person or at a particular time or
106
place, or that the property is of a particular quality or has passed through a particular office, or that it is
entitled to any exemption, or uses as genuine any such mark knowing the same to be counterfeit, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall
also be liable to fine.
348. Making or possession of any instrument for counterfeiting a property mark.—Whoever
makes or has in his possession any die, plate or other instrument for the purpose of counterfeiting a
property mark, or has in his possession a property mark for the purpose of denoting that any goods belong
to a person to whom they do not belong, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
349. Selling goods marked with a counterfeit property mark.—Whoever sells, or exposes, or has
in possession for sale, any goods or things with a counterfeit property mark affixed to or impressed upon
the same or to or upon any case, package or other receptacle in which such goods are contained, shall,
unless he proves—
(a) that, having taken all reasonable precautions against committing an offence against this
section, he had at the time of the commission of the alleged offence no reason to suspect the
genuineness of the mark; and
(b) that, on demand made by or on behalf of the prosecutor, he gave all the information in his
power with respect to the persons from whom he obtained such goods or things; or
(c) that otherwise he had acted innocently,
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with
fine, or with both.
350. Making a false mark upon any receptacle containing goods.—(1) Whoever makes any false
mark upon any case, package or other receptacle containing goods, in a manner reasonably calculated to
cause any public servant or any other person to believe that such receptacle contains goods which it does
not contain or that it does not contain goods which it does contain, or that the goods contained in such
receptacle are of a nature or quality different from the real nature or quality thereof, shall, unless he
proves that he acted without intent to defraud, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
(2) Whoever makes use of any false mark in any manner prohibited under sub-section (1) shall,
unless he proves that he acted without intent to defraud,
be punished as if he had committed the offence under sub-section (1).
CHAPTER XIX
OF CRIMINAL INTIMIDATION, INSULT, ANNOYANCE, DEFAMATION, ETC.
351. Criminal intimidation.—(1) Whoever threatens another by any means, with any injury to his
person, reputation or property, or to the person or reputation of any one in whom that person is interested,
with intent to cause alarm to that person, or to cause that person to do any act which he is not legally
bound to do, or to omit to do any act which that person is legally entitled to do, as the means of avoiding
the execution of such threat, commits criminal intimidation.
Explanation.—A threat to injure the reputation of any deceased person in whom the person
threatened is interested, is within this section.
Illustration.
A, for the purpose of inducing B to resist from prosecuting a civil suit, threatens to burn B’s house. A
is guilty of criminal intimidation.
(2) Whoever commits the offence of criminal intimidation shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
(3) Whoever commits the offence of criminal intimidation by threatening to cause death or grievous
hurt, or to cause the destruction of any property by fire, or to cause an offence punishable with death or
107
imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years, or to impute
unchastity to a woman, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both.
(4) Whoever commits the offence of criminal intimidation by an anonymous communication, or
having taken precaution to conceal the name or abode of the person from whom the threat comes, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, in addition
to the punishment provided for the offence under sub-section (1).
352. Intentional insult with intent to provoke breach of peace.—Whoever intentionally insults in
any manner, and thereby gives provocation to any person, intending or knowing it to be likely that such
provocation will cause him to break the public peace, or to commit any other offence, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with
both.
353. Statements conducing to public mischief.—(1) Whoever makes, publishes or circulates any
statement, false information, rumour, or report, including through electronic means—
(a) with intent to cause, or which is likely to cause, any officer, soldier, sailor or airman in the
Army, Navy or Air Force of India to mutiny or otherwise disregard or fail in his duty as such; or
(b) with intent to cause, or which is likely to cause, fear or alarm to the public, or to any section
of the public whereby any person may be induced to commit an offence against the State or against
the public tranquillity; or
(c) with intent to incite, or which is likely to incite, any class or community of persons to commit
any offence against any other class or community,
shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
(2) Whoever makes, publishes or circulates any statement or report containing false information,
rumour or alarming news, including through electronic means, with intent to create or promote, or which
is likely to create or promote, on grounds of religion, race, place of birth, residence, language, caste or
community or any other ground whatsoever, feelings of enmity, hatred or ill will between different
religious, racial, language or regional groups or castes or communities, shall be punished with
imprisonment which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
(3) Whoever commits an offence specified in sub-section (2) in any place of worship or in any
assembly engaged in the performance of religious worship or religious ceremonies, shall be punished
with imprisonment which may extend to five years and shall also be liable to fine.
Exception.—It does not amount to an offence, within the meaning of this section, when the person
making, publishing or circulating any such statement, false information, rumour or report, has reasonable
grounds for believing that such statement, false information, rumour or report is true and makes,
publishes or circulates it in good faith and without any such intent as aforesaid.
354. Act caused by inducing person to believe that he will be rendered an object of Divine
displeasure.—Whoever voluntarily causes or attempts to cause any person to do anything which that
person is not legally bound to do, or to omit to do anything which he is legally entitled to do, by inducing
or attempting to induce that person to believe that he or any person in whom he is interested will become
or will be rendered by some act of the offender an object of Divine displeasure if he does not do the thing
which it is the object of the offender to cause him to do, or if he does the thing which it is the object of
the offender to cause him to omit, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.
Illustrations.
(a) A sits dharna at Z’s door with the intention of causing it to be believed that, by so sitting, he
renders Z an object of Divine displeasure. A has committed the offence defined in this section.
108
(b) A threatens Z that, unless Z performs a certain act, A will kill one of A’s own children, under
such circumstances that the killing would be believed to render Z an object of Divine displeasure. A has
committed the offence defined in this section.
355. Misconduct in public by a drunken person.—Whoever, in a state of intoxication, appears in
any public place, or in any place which it is a trespass in him to enter, and there conducts himself in such
a manner as to cause annoyance to any person, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term
which may extend to twenty-four hours, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with
both or with community service.
Of defamation
356. Defamation.—(1) Whoever, by words either spoken or intended to be read, or by signs or by
visible representations, makes or publishes in any manner, any imputation concerning any person
intending to harm, or knowing or having reason to believe that such imputation will harm, the reputation
of such person, is said, except in the cases hereinafter excepted, to defame that person.
Explanation 1.—It may amount to defamation to impute anything to a deceased person, if the
imputation would harm the reputation of that person if living, and is intended to be hurtful to the feelings
of his family or other near relatives.
Explanation 2.—It may amount to defamation to make an imputation concerning a company or an
association or collection of persons as such.
Explanation 3.—An imputation in the form of an alternative or expressed ironically, may amount to
defamation.
Explanation 4.—No imputation is said to harm a person’s reputation, unless that imputation directly
or indirectly, in the estimation of others, lowers the moral or intellectual character of that person, or
lowers the character of that person in respect of his caste or of his calling, or lowers the credit of that
person, or causes it to be believed that the body of that person is in a loathsome state, or in a state
generally considered as disgraceful.
Illustrations.
(a) A says—“Z is an honest man; he never stole B’s watch”; intending to cause it to be believed that
Z did steal B’s watch. This is defamation, unless it falls within one of the exceptions.
(b) A is asked who stole B’s watch. A points to Z, intending to cause it to be believed that Z stole B’s
watch. This is defamation, unless it falls within one of the exceptions.
(c) A draws a picture of Z running away with B’s watch, intending it to be believed that Z stole B’s
watch. This is defamation, unless it falls within one of the exceptions.
Exception 1.—It is not defamation to impute anything which is true concerning any person, if it be
for the public good that the imputation should be made or published. Whether or not it is for the public
good is a question of fact.
Exception 2.—It is not defamation to express in good faith any opinion whatever respecting the
conduct of a public servant in the discharge of his public functions, or respecting his character, so far as
his character appears in that conduct, and no further.
Exception 3.—It is not defamation to express in good faith any opinion whatever respecting the
conduct of any person touching any public question, and respecting his character, so far as his character
appears in that conduct, and no further.
Illustration.
It is not defamation in A to express in good faith any opinion whatever respecting Z’s conduct in
petitioning Government on a public question, in signing a requisition for a meeting on a public question,
in presiding or attending at such meeting, in forming or joining any society which invites the public
support, in voting or canvassing for a particular candidate for any situation in the efficient discharge of
the duties of which the public is interested.
109
Exception 4.—It is not defamation to publish substantially true report of the proceedings of a Court,
or of the result of any such proceedings.
Explanation.—A Magistrate or other officer holding an inquiry in open Court preliminary to a trial in
a Court, is a Court within the meaning of the above section.
Exception 5.—It is not defamation to express in good faith any opinion whatever respecting the
merits of any case, civil or criminal, which has been decided by a Court, or respecting the conduct of any
person as a party, witness or agent, in any such case, or respecting the character of such person, as far as
his character appears in that conduct, and no further.
Illustrations.
(a) A says—“I think Z’s evidence on that trial is so contradictory that he must be stupid or
dishonest”. A is within this exception if he says this in good faith, in as much as the opinion which he
expresses respects Z’s character as it appears in Z’s conduct as a witness, and no further.
(b) But if A says—“I do not believe what Z asserted at that trial because I know him to be a man
without veracity”; A is not within this exception, in as much as the opinion which expresses of Z’s
character, is an opinion not founded on Z’s conduct as a witness.
Exception 6.—It is not defamation to express in good faith any opinion respecting the merits of any
performance which its author has submitted to the judgment of the public, or respecting the character of
the author so far as his character appears in such performance, and no further.
Explanation.—A performance may be submitted to the judgment of the public expressly or by acts on
the part of the author which imply such submission to the judgment of the public.
Illustrations.
(a) A person who publishes a book, submits that book to the judgment of the public.
(b) A person who makes a speech in public, submits that speech to the judgment of the public.
(c) An actor or singer who appears on a public stage, submits his acting or singing to the judgment of
the public.
(d) A says of a book published by Z—“Z’s book is foolish; Z must be a weak man. Z’s book is
indecent; Z must be a man of impure mind”. A is within the exception, if he says this in good faith, in as
much as the opinion which he expresses of Z respects Z’s character only so far as it appears in Z’s book,
and no further.
(e) But if A says “I am not surprised that Z’s book is foolish and indecent, for he is a weak man and a
libertine”. A is not within this exception, in as much as the opinion which he expresses of Z’s character is
an opinion not founded on Z’s book.
Exception 7.—It is not defamation in a person having over another any authority, either conferred by
law or arising out of a lawful contract made with that other, to pass in good faith any censure on the
conduct of that other in matters to which such lawful authority relates.
Illustration.
A Judge censuring in good faith the conduct of a witness, or of an officer of the Court; a head of a
department censuring in good faith those who are under his orders, a parent censuring in good faith a
child in the presence of other children; a school master, whose authority is derived from a parent,
censuring in good faith a pupil in the presence of other pupils; a master censuring a servant in good faith
for remissness in service; a banker censuring in good faith the cashier of his bank for the conduct of such
cashier as such cashier are within this exception.
Exception 8.—It is not defamation to prefer in good faith an accusation against any person to any of
those who have lawful authority over that person with respect to the subject-matter of accusation.
110
Illustration.
If A in good faith accuses Z before a Magistrate; if A in good faith complains of the conduct of Z, a
servant, to Z’s master; if A in good faith complains of the conduct of Z, a child, to Z’s father, A is within
this exception.
Exception 9.—It is not defamation to make an imputation on the character of another provided that
the imputation be made in good faith for the protection of the interests of the person making it, or of any
other person, or for the public good.
Illustrations.
(a) A, a shopkeeper, says to B, who manages his business—“Sell nothing to Z unless he pays you
ready money, for I have no opinion of his honesty”. A is within the exception, if he has made this
imputation on Z in good faith for the protection of his own interests.
(b) A, a Magistrate, in making a report to his own superior officer, casts an imputation on the
character of Z. Here, if the imputation is made in good faith, and for the public good, A is within the
exception.
Exception 10.—It is not defamation to convey a caution, in good faith, to one person against another,
provided that such caution be intended for the good of the person to whom it is conveyed, or of some
person in whom that person is interested, or for the public good.
(2) Whoever defames another shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may
extend to two years, or with fine, or with both, or with community service.
(3) Whoever prints or engraves any matter, knowing or having good reason to believe that such
matter is defamatory of any person, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may
extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
(4) Whoever sells or offers for sale any printed or engraved substance containing defamatory matter,
knowing that it contains such matter, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may
extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
Of breach of contract to attend on and supply wants of helpless person
357. Breach of contract to attend on and supply wants of helpless person.—Whoever, being
bound by a lawful contract to attend on or to supply the wants of any person who, by reason of youth, or
of unsoundness of mind, or of a disease or bodily weakness, is helpless or incapable of providing for his
own safety or of supplying his own wants, voluntarily omits so to do, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may
extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
CHAPTER XX
REPEAL AND SAVINGS
358. Repeal and savings.—(1) The Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) is hereby repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Code referred to in sub-section (1), it shall not affect,—
(a) the previous operation of the Code so repealed or anything duly done or suffered thereunder;
or
(b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred under the Code so
repealed; or
(c) any penalty, or punishment incurred in respect of any offences committed against the Code so
repealed; or
(d) any investigation or remedy in respect of any such penalty, or punishment; or
(e) any proceeding, investigation or remedy in respect of any such penalty or punishment as
aforesaid, and any such proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced, and any such
penalty may be imposed as if that Code had not been repealed.
(3) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Code shall be
deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Sanhita.
111
(4) The mention of particular matters in sub-section (2) shall not be held to prejudice or affect the
general application of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897) with regard to the effect of
the repeal.
112
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In the year 1834, the first Indian Law Commission was constituted under the Chairman-ship of Lord
Thomas Babington Macaulay to examine the jurisdiction, power and rules of the existing Courts as well
as the police establishments and the laws in force in India.
2. The Commission suggested various enactments to the Government. One of the important
recommendations made by the Commission was on, Indian Penal Code which was enacted in 1860 and
the said Code is still continuing in the country with some amendments made thereto from time to time.
3. The Government of India considered it expedient and necessary to review the existing criminal
laws with an aim to strengthen law and order and also focus on simplifying legal procedure so that ease
of living is ensured to the common man. The Government also considered to make existing laws relevant
to the contemporary situation and provide speedy justice to common man. Accordingly, various
stakeholders were consulted keeping in mind contemporary needs and aspirations of the people and with
a view to create a legal structure which is citizen centric and to secure life and liberty of the citizens.
4. Now, it is proposed to enact a new law, namely, the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita Bill, 2023 by
repealing the Indian Penal Code to streamline provisions relating to offences and penalties. It is proposed
to provide first time community service as one of the punishments for petty offences. The offences
against women and children, murder and offences against the State have been given precedence. The
various offences have been made gender neutral. In order to deal effectively with the problem of
organised crimes and terrorist activities, new offences of terrorist acts and organised crime have been
added in the Bill with deterrent punishments. A new offence on acts of secession, armed rebellion,
subversive activities, separatist activities or endangering sovereignty or unity and integrity of India has
also been added. The fines and punishment for various offences have also been suitably enhanced.
5. Accordingly, a Bill, namely, the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 was introduced in the Lok Sabha
on 11th August, 2023. The Bill was referred to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Home Affairs for its consideration and report. The Committee after deliberations made its
recommendations in its report submitted on 10th November, 2023. The recommendations made by the
Committee have been considered by the Government and it has been decided to withdraw the Bill
pending in Lok Sabha and introduce a new Bill incorporating therein those recommendations made by the
Committee that have been accepted by the Government.
6. The Notes on Clauses explains the various provisions of the Bill.
7. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
AMIT SHAH.
NEW DELHI;
The 9th August, 2023.
################################################################################




================================================================================
                    INDIAN LEGAL CASES DATABASE
================================================================================
Source: Indian Kanoon (https://indiankanoon.org/)
Total Cases: 30
Created: 28-December-2024
Purpose: RAG-based Legal Case Search System
================================================================================


################################################################################
                        CATEGORY 1: IPC 420 - CHEATING
                              (5 CASES)
################################################################################

================================================================================
CASE 1: 
Supreme Court of India
P. Chidambaram vs Directorate Of Enforcement on 5 September, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 SUPREME COURT 4198, 2019 (9) SCC 24, AIRONLINE 2019 SC 1001, 2019 CRI LJ 4754, 2019 (6) ADR 401, (2019) 12 SCALE 94, (2019) 3 CRIMES 410, 2019 (3) SCC (CRI) 509, (2019) 4 BOMCR(CRI) 809, (2019) 4 MAD LJ(CRI) 188, (2019) 4 PAT LJR 19, (2019) 4 RECCRIR 875, (2019) 76 OCR 498, AIR 2019 SC( CRI) 1539
Author: R. Banumathi
Bench: A.S. Bopanna, R. Banumathi
                                                         1

                                                                                REPORTABLE

                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                      CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1340 2019
                                   (Arising out of SLP(Crl.) No.7523 of 2019)

     P. CHIDAMBARAM                                                    ...Appellant

                                                     VERSUS

     DIRECTORATE OF ENFORCEMENT                                       …Respondent



                                                 JUDGMENT
R. BANUMATHI, J.


Leave granted.

2. This appeal relates to the alleged irregularities in Foreign Investment Promotion Board (FIPB) clearance given to the INX Media for receiving foreign investment to the tune of Rs.305 crores against approved inflow of Rs.4.62 crores. The High Court of Delhi rejected the appellant’s plea for anticipatory bail in the case registered by Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) being RC No.220/2017-E-0011 under Section 120B IPC read with Section 420 IPC, Section 8 and Section 13(2) read with Section 13(1)(d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988. By the impugned order dated 20.08.2019, the High Court also refused to grant anticipatory bail in the case registered by the Enforcement Directorate in ECIR No.07/HIU/2017 punishable under Sections 3 and 4 of the Prevention of Money-Laundering Act, 2002.

3. Grievance of the appellant is that against the impugned order of the High Court, the appellant tried to get the matter listed in the Supreme Court on 21.08.2019; but the appellant could not get an urgent hearing in the Supreme Court seeking stay of the impugned order of the High Court. The appellant was arrested by the CBI on the night of 21.08.2019. Since the appellant was arrested and remanded to custody in CBI case, in view of the judgment of the Constitution Bench in Shri Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia and others v. State of Punjab (1980) 2 SCC 565, the appellant cannot seek anticipatory bail after he is arrested. Accordingly, SLP(Crl.) No.7525 of 2019 preferred by the appellant qua the CBI case was dismissed as infructuous vide order dated 26.08.2019 on the ground that the appellant has already been arrested and remanded to custody. This Court granted liberty to the appellant to work out his remedy in accordance with law.

4. On 15.05.2017, CBI registered FIR in RC No.220/2017-E-0011 under Section 120B IPC read with Section 420 IPC, Section 8 and Section 13(2) read with Section 13(1)(d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 against the accused viz. (i) INX Media through its Director Indrani Mukherjea; (ii) INX News through its Director Sh. Pratim Mukherjea @ Peter Mukherjea and others; (iii) Sh. Karti P. Chidambaram; (iv) Chess Management Services through its Director Sh. Karti P. Chidambaram and others; (v) Advantage Strategic Consulting through its Director Ms. Padma Vishwanathan @ Padma Bhaskararaman and others; (vi) unknown officers/officials of Ministry of Finance, Govt. of India; and (vii) other unknown persons for the alleged irregularities in giving FIPB’s clearance to INX Media to receive overseas funds of Rs.305 crores against approved Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) of Rs.4.62 crores.

5. Case of the prosecution in the predicate offence is that in 2007, INX Media Pvt. Ltd. approached Foreign Investment Promotion Board (FIPB) seeking approval for FDI upto 46.216 per cent of the issued equity capital. While sending the proposal by INX Media to be placed before the FIPB, INX Media had clearly mentioned in it the inflow of FDI to the extent of Rs.4,62,16,000/- taking the proposed issue at its face value. The FIPB in its meeting held on 18.05.2007 recommended the proposal of INX Media subject to the approval of the Finance Minister-the appellant. In the meeting, the Board did not approve the downstream investment by INX Media in INX News. In violation of the conditions of the approval, the recommendation of FIPB:- (i) INX Media deliberately made a downstream investment to the extent of 26% in the capital of INX News Ltd. without specific approval of FIPB which included indirect foreign investment by the same Foreign Investors; (ii) generated more than Rs.305 crores FDI in INX Media which is in clear violation of the approved foreign flow of Rs.4.62 crores by issuing shares to the foreign investors at a premium of more than Rs.800/- per share.

6. Upon receipt of a complaint on the basis of a cheque for an amount of Rs.10,00,000/- made in favour of M/s Advantage Strategic Consulting Private Limited (ASCPL) by INX Media, the investigation wing of the Income Tax Department proceeded to investigate the matter and the relevant information was sought from the FIPB, which in turn, vide its letter dated 26.05.2008 sought clarification from the INX Media which justified its action saying that the downstream investment has been authorised and that the same was made in accordance with the approval of FIPB. It is alleged by the prosecution that in order to get out of the situation without any penal provision, INX Media entered into a criminal conspiracy with Sh. Karti Chidambaram, Promoter Director, Chess Management Services Pvt. Ltd. and the appellant-the then Finance Minister of India. INX Media through the letter dated 26.06.2008 tried to justify their action stating that the downstream investment has been approved and the same was made in accordance with approval.

7. The FIR further alleges that for the services rendered by Sh. Karti Chidambaram to INX Media through Chess Management Services in getting the issues scuttled by influencing the public servants of FIPB unit of the Ministry of Finance, consideration in the form of payments were received against invoices raised on INX Media by ASCPL. It is alleged in the FIR that the very reason for getting the invoices raised in the name of ASCPL for the services rendered by Chess Management Services was with a view to conceal the identity of Sh. Karti Chidambaram inasmuch as on the day when the invoices were raised and payment was received. It is stated that Sh. Karti Chidambaram was the Promoter, Director of Chess Management Services whereas ASCPL was being controlled by him indirectly. It is alleged that the invoices approximately for an amount of Rs.3.50 crores were falsely got raised in favour of INX Media in the name of other companies in which Sh. Karti Chidambaram was having sustainable interest either directly or indirectly. It is alleged that such invoices were falsely got raised for creation of acquisition of media content, consultancy in respect of market research, acquisition of content of various genre of Audio- Video etc. It is alleged that INX Media Group in his record has clearly mentioned the purpose of payment of Rs.10,00,000/- to ASCPL as towards “management consultancy charges towards FIPB notification and clarification”. Alleging that the above acts of omission and commission prima facie disclose commission of offence, CBI has registered FIR in RC No.220/2017-E-0011 on 15.05.2017 under Section 120B read with Section 420 IPC, Section 8 and Section 13(2) read with Section 13(1)(d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 against the aforesaid accused.

8. On the basis of the said FIR registered by CBI, the Enforcement Directorate registered a case in ECIR No.07/HIU/2017 against the aforesaid accused persons for allegedly committing the offence punishable under Sections 3 and 4 of the Prevention of Money-Laundering Act, 2002 (PMLA). Ever since the registration of the cases in 2017, there were various proceedings seeking bail and number of other proceedings pending filed by Sh. Karti Chidambaram and other accused. Finally, the Delhi High Court granted bail to Sh. Karti Chidambaram in INX Media case filed by CBI on 23.03.2018. Thereafter, the appellant moved Delhi High Court seeking anticipatory bail both in CBI case and also in money-laundering case filed by Enforcement Directorate. On 25.07.2018, the Delhi High Court granted the appellant interim protection from arrest in both the cases and the same was extended till 20.08.2019 – the date on which the High Court dismissed the appellant’s petition refusing to grant anticipatory bail.

9. The High Court dismissed the application refusing to grant anticipatory bail to the appellant by holding that “it is a classic case of money-laundering”. The High Court observed that “it is a clear case of money-laundering”. The learned Single Judge dismissed the application for anticipatory bail by holding “that the alleged irregularities committed by the appellant makes out a prima facie case for refusing pre-arrest bail to the appellant”. The learned Single Judge also held that “considering the gravity of the offence and the evasive reply given by the appellant to the questions put to him while he was under the protective cover extended to him by the court are the twin factors which weigh to deny the pre-arrest bail to the appellant”. Being aggrieved, the appellant has preferred this appeal.

10. Lengthy arguments were heard on number of hearings stretched over for long time. Learned Senior counsel appearing for the appellant Mr. Kapil Sibal and Mr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi made meticulous submissions on the concept of life and liberty enshrined in Article 21 of the Constitution of India to urge that the appellant is entitled to the privilege of anticipatory bail. Arguments were also advanced on various aspects – whether the court can look into the materials produced by the respondent-Enforcement Directorate to seek custody of the appellant when the appellant was not confronted with those documents on the three dates of interrogation of the appellant conducted on 19.12.2018, 01.01.2019 and 21.01.2019. Interlocutory application was filed by the appellant to produce the transcripts of the questions put to the appellant and the answers given by the appellant, recorded by Enforcement Directorate. Countering the above submissions, Mr. Tushar Mehta, learned Solicitor General made the submissions that grant of anticipatory bail is not part of Article 21 of the Constitution of India. Mr. Tushar Mehta urged that having regard to the materials collected by the respondent-Enforcement Directorate and the specific inputs and in view of the provisions of the special enactment- PMLA, custodial interrogation of the appellant is required and the appellant is not entitled to the privilege of anticipatory bail.

Contention of Mr. Kapil Sibal, learned Senior counsel:-

11. Mr. Kapil Sibal, learned Senior counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant submitted that the clearance for INX FDI was approved by Foreign Investment Promotion Board (FIPB) consisting of six Secretaries and the appellant as the then Finance Minister granted approval in the normal course of official business. The learned Senior counsel submitted that the crux of the allegation is that the appellant’s son Sh. Karti Chidambaram tried to influence the officials of FIPB for granting ex-post facto approval for downstream investment by INX Media to INX News; whereas neither the Board members of FIPB nor the officials of FIPB have stated anything about the appellant’s son Sh. Karti Chidambaram that he approached and influenced them for ex-post facto approval. The learned Senior counsel contended that the entire case alleges about money paid to ASCPL and Sh. Karti Chidambaram is neither the share-holder nor a Director in the said ASCPL; but the Enforcement Directorate has falsely alleged that Sh. Karti Chidambaram has been controlling the company- ASCPL. It was submitted that the appellant has nothing to do with the said ASCPL to whom money has been paid by INX Media.

12. Taking us through the impugned judgment and the note said to have been submitted by the Enforcement Directorate before the High Court, the learned Senior counsel submitted that the learned Single Judge has “copied and pasted” paragraphs after paragraphs of the note given by the respondent in the court. It was urged that there was no basis for the allegations contained in the said note to substantiate the alleged transactions/transfer of money as stated in the tabular column given in the impugned order.

13. So far as the sealed cover containing the materials sought to be handed over by the Enforcement Directorate, the learned Senior counsel raised strong objections and submitted that the Enforcement Directorate cannot randomly produce the documents in the court “behind the back” of the appellant for seeking custody of the appellant. Strong objections were raised for the plea of Enforcement Directorate requesting the court to receive the sealed cover and for looking into the documents/material collected during the investigation allegedly showing the trail of money in the name of companies and the money-laundering.

14. The appellant was interrogated by the respondent on three dates viz. 19.12.2018, 01.01.2019 and 21.01.2019. So far as the observation of the High Court that the appellant was “evasive” during interrogation, the learned Senior counsel submitted that the appellant has well cooperated with the respondent and the respondent cannot allege that the appellant was “non-cooperative”. On behalf of the appellant, an application has also been filed seeking direction to the respondent to produce the transcripts of the questioning conducted on 19.12.2018, 01.01.2019 and 21.01.2019. The learned Senior counsel submitted that the transcripts will show whether the appellant was “evasive” or not during his questioning as alleged by the respondent.

15. Learned Senior counsel submitted that the provision for anticipatory bail i.e. Section 438 Cr.P.C. has to be interpreted in a fair and reasonable manner and while so, the High Court has mechanically rejected the anticipatory bail. It was further submitted that in case of offences of the nature alleged, everything is borne out by the records and there is no question of the appellant being “evasive”. The learned Senior counsel also submitted that co-accused Sh. Karti Chidambaram and Padma Bhaskararaman were granted bail and the other accused Indrani Mukherjea and Sh. Pratim Mukherjea @ Peter Mukherjea are on statutory bail and the appellant is entitled to bail on parity also.

Contention of Mr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi, learned Senior counsel:-

16. Reiterating the submission of Mr. Kapil Sibal, Mr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi, learned Senior counsel submitted that the Enforcement Directorate cannot say that the appellant was “non-cooperative” and “evasive”. Mr. Singhvi also urged for production of transcripts i.e. questions put to the appellant and the answers which would show whether the appellant has properly responded to the questions or not. Placing reliance upon Additional District Magistrate, Jabalpur v. Shivakant Shukla (1976) 2 SCC 521, the learned Senior counsel submitted that the respondent cannot rely upon the documents without furnishing those documents to the appellant or without questioning the appellant about the materials collected during the investigation. Reiterating the submission of Mr. Sibal, Mr. Singhvi contended that the High Court has denied anticipatory bail to the appellant on the basis of materials produced by the respondent in the cover before the court which were never shown to the appellant nor was the appellant confronted with the same. The learned Senior counsel submitted that the alleged occurrence was of the year 2007-08 and Sections 420 IPC and 120B IPC and Section 13 of the Prevention of Corruption Act were not part of the “scheduled offence” of Prevention of Money-Laundering Act in 2008 and were introduced by a notification dated 01.06.2009 and in view of the protection given under Article 20(1) of the Constitution of India, there can never be a retrospective operation of a criminal/penal statute. Placing reliance upon Rao Shiv Bahadur Singh and another v. State of Vindhya Pradesh AIR 1953 SC 394, it was contended that the appellant has to substantiate the contention that the acts charged as offences were offences “at the time of commission of the offence”. The learned Senior counsel urged that in 2007-2008 when the alleged acts of commission and omission were committed, they were not “scheduled offences” and hence prosecution under Prevention of Money-Laundering Act, 2002 is not maintainable.

17. The learned Senior counsel has taken strong exception to the two factors stated by the High Court in the impugned order for denying pre- arrest bail i.e. (i) gravity of the offence; and (ii) the appellant was “evasive” to deny the anticipatory bail. The learned Senior counsel submitted that the “gravity of the offence” cannot be the perception of the individual or the court and the test for “gravity of the offence” should be the punishment prescribed by the statute for the offence committed. Insofar as the finding of the High Court that “the appellant was evasive to the questions”, the learned Senior counsel submitted that the investigating agency- Enforcement Directorate cannot expect an accused to give answers in the manner they want and that the accused is entitled to protection under Article 20(3) of the Constitution of India. Reliance was placed upon Santosh s/o Dwarkadas Fafat v. State of Maharashtra (2017) 9 SCC 714. Contention of Mr. Tushar Mehta, learned Solicitor General:-

18. Taking us through the Statement of Objects and Reasons and salient features of the PMLA, the learned Solicitor General submitted that India is a part of the global community having responsibility to crackdown on money- laundering with an effective legislation and PMLA is a result of the joint initiatives taken by several nations. Taking us through the various provisions of the PMLA, the learned Solicitor General submitted that money-laundering poses a serious threat to the financial system and financial integrity of the nation and has to be sternly dealt with. It was submitted that PMLA offence has two dimensions – predicate offence and money-laundering. Money-laundering is a separate and independent offence punishable under Section 4 read with Section 3 of the PMLA.

19. Learned Solicitor General submitted that under Section 19 of PMLA, specified officers, on the basis of material in possession, having reason to believe which is to be recorded in writing that the person has been guilty of the offence under the Act, have power to arrest. It was urged that the power to arrest and necessary safeguards are enshrined under Section 19 of the Act. It was submitted that since respondent has collected cogent materials to show that it is a case of money-laundering and the Enforcement Directorate has issued Letter rogatory and if the Court intervenes by granting anticipatory bail, the authority cannot exercise the statutory right of arrest and interrogate the appellant.

20. The learned Solicitor General submitted that they have obtained specific inputs from overseas banks and also about the companies and properties and it is a clear case of money-laundering. The learned Solicitor General submitted that the Court has power to look into the materials so collected by the Enforcement Directorate and the same cannot be shared with the appellant at this initial stage when the Court is considering the matter for grant of pre-arrest bail. Relying upon number of judgments, the learned Solicitor General has submitted that as a matter of practice, Courts have always perused the case diaries produced by the prosecution and receive and peruse the materials/documents to satisfy its judicial conscience. In support of his contention, learned Solicitor General placed reliance upon Romila Thapar and Others v. Union of India and Others (2018) 10 SCC 753, Jai Prakash Singh v. State of Bihar and Another (2012) 4 SCC 379 and Directorate of Enforcement and Another v. P.V. Prabhakar Rao (1997) 6 SCC 647 and other judgments and requested the Court to peruse the materials produced by the Enforcement Directorate in the sealed cover.

21. Opposing the grant of anticipatory bail, the learned Solicitor General submitted that the Enforcement Directorate has cogent evidence to prove that it is a case of money-laundering and there is a need of custodial interrogation of the appellant. The learned Solicitor General submitted that the economic offences stand as a class apart and custodial interrogation is required for the Enforcement Directorate to trace the trail of money and prayed for dismissal of the appeal.

22. As noted earlier, the predicate offences are under Sections 120B IPC and 420 IPC, Section 8 and Section 13(2) read with Section 13(1)(d) of Prevention of Corruption Act. Case is registered against the appellant and others under Sections 3 and 4 of PMLA. The main point falling for consideration is whether the appellant is entitled to the privilege of anticipatory bail. In order to consider whether the appellant is to be granted the privilege of anticipatory bail, it is necessary to consider the salient features of the special enactment – Prevention of Money-Laundering Act, 2002.

23. Prevention of Money-laundering Act, 2002 – Special Enactment:-

Money-laundering is the process of concealing illicit sources of money and the launderer transforming the money proceeds derived from criminal activity into funds and moved to other institution or transformed into legitimate asset. It is realised world around that money laundering poses a serious threat not only to the financial systems of the countries but also to their integrity and sovereignty. The Prevention of Money-laundering Act, 2002 was enacted in pursuance of the Political Declaration adopted by the Special Session of the United Nations General Assembly held in June 1998, calling upon the Member States to adopt national money-laundering legislation and programme, primarily with a view to meet out the serious threat posed by money laundering to the financial system of the countries and to their integrity and sovereignty.
24. Statement of Objects and Reasons to the Prevention of Money- laundering Act, 2002 recognises that money laundering poses a serious threat not only to the financial systems of the countries but also to their integrity and sovereignty. PMLA is a special enactment containing the provisions with adequate safeguards with a view to prevent money- laundering. The Preamble to the Prevention of Money-Laundering Act, 2002 states that “An Act to prevent money-laundering and to provide for confiscation of property derived from, or involved in, money-laundering and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.”

25. Chapter II of PMLA contains provisions relating to the offences of money-laundering. Section 2(1)(p) of PMLA defines “money-laundering” that it has the same meaning assigned to it in Section 3. Section 2(1)(ra) of PMLA defines “offence of cross border implications”. To prevent offences of “cross border implications”, PMLA contains Sections 55 to 61 dealing with reciprocal arrangement for assistance in certain matters and procedure for attachment and confiscation of property between the contracting States with regard to the offences of money-laundering and predicate offences. Section 2(1)(y) of PMLA defines “scheduled offence” which reads as under:-

“2. Definitions – (1)…… (y) “scheduled offence” means –
(i) the offences specified under Part A of the Scheduled; or
(ii) the offences specified under Part B of the Schedule if the total value involved in such offences is one crore rupees or more; or
(iii)the offences specified under Part C of the Schedule.” “Scheduled Offence” is a sine qua non for the offence of money-laundering which would generate the money that is being laundered. PMLA contains Schedules which originally contained three parts namely Part A, Part B and Part C. Part A contains various paragraphs which enumerate offences under the Indian Penal Code, Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985, offences under the Explosives Substances Act, 1908 and the offences under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (paragraph 8) etc. The Schedule was amended by Act 21 of 2009 (w.e.f. 01.06.2009). Section 13 of Prevention of Corruption Act was inserted in the Part A of the Schedule to PMLA by the Amendment Act, 16 of 2018 (w.e.f. 26.07.2018).
26. Section 3 of PMLA stipulates “money-laundering” to be an offence. Section 3 of PMLA states that whosoever directly or indirectly attempts to indulge or knowingly assists or knowingly is a party or is actually involved in any process or activity connected with the proceeds of the crime and projecting it as untainted property shall be guilty of the offences of money laundering. The provisions of the PMLA including Section 3 have undergone various amendments. The words in Section 3 “with the proceeds of crime and projecting” has been amended as “proceeds of crime including its concealment, possession, acquisition or use and projecting or claiming” by the Amendment Act 2 of 2013 (w.e.f. 15.02.2013).

27. Section 4 of PMLA deals with punishment for money laundering. Prior to Amendment Act 2 of 2013, Section 4 provided punishment with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years but which may extend to seven years and the fine which may extend to Rs.5,00,000/-. By Amendment Act 2 of 2013, Section 4 is amended w.e.f. 15.02.2013 vide S.O. 343(E) dated 08.02.2013. Now, the punishment prescribed under Section 4 of PMLA to the offender is rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years but which may extend to seven years and the offender is also liable to pay fine. The limit of fine has been done away with and now after the amendment, appropriate fine even above Rs.5,00,000/- can be imposed against the offender.

28. Section 5 of PMLA which provides for attachment of property involved in money laundering, states that where the Director or any other officer not below the rank of Deputy Director authorised by the Director for the purposes of this Section, has “reason to believe” (the reason for such belief to be recorded in writing), on the basis of material in his possession, that (a) any person is in possession of any proceeds of crime; and (b) such proceeds of crime are likely to be concealed, transferred or dealt with in any manner which may result in frustrating any proceedings relating to confiscation of such proceeds of crime under Chapter III, he may, by order in writing, provisionally attach such property for a period not exceeding one hundred and fifty days from the date of the order, in such manner as may be prescribed. Section 5 provides that no such order of attachment shall be made unless, in relation to the scheduled offence, a report has been forwarded to a Magistrate under Section 173 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), or a complaint has been filed by a person authorised to investigate the offence mentioned in that Schedule, before a Magistrate or court for taking cognizance of the scheduled offence, as the case may be.

29. The term “reason to believe” is not defined in PMLA. The expression “reason to believe” has been defined in Section 26 of IPC. As per the definition in Section 26 IPC, a person is said to have “reason to believe” a thing, if he has sufficient cause to believe that thing but not otherwise. The specified officer must have “reason to believe” on the basis of material in his possession that the property sought to be attached is likely to be concealed, transferred or dealt with in a manner which may result in frustrating any proceedings for confiscation of their property under the Act. It is stated that in the present case, exercising power under Section 5 of the PMLA, the Adjudicating Authority had attached some of the properties of the appellant. Challenging the attachment, the appellant and others are said to have preferred appeal before the Appellate Tribunal and stay has been granted by the Appellate Authority and the said appeal is stated to be pending.

30. As rightly submitted by the learned Solicitor General, sufficient safeguards are provided under the provisions of PMLA. Under Section 5 of PMLA, the Director or any other officer not below the rank of Deputy Director authorised by the Director for the purposes of Section 5 who passed the impugned order is required to have “reason to believe” that the properties sought to be attached would be transferred or dealt with in a manner which would frustrate the proceedings relating to confiscation of such properties. Further, the officer who passed the order of attachment is required to record the reasons for such belief. The provisions of the PMLA and the Rules also provide for manner of forwarding a copy of the order of provisional attachment of property along with material under sub-section (2) of Section 5 of PMLA to the Adjudicating Authority.

31. In order to ensure the safeguards, in exercise of power under Section 73 of PMLA, the Central Government has framed “The Prevention of Money-Laundering (The Manner of Forwarding a Copy of the Order of Provisional Attachment of Property along with the Material, and Copy of the Reasons along with the Material in respect of Survey, to the Adjudicating Authority and its period of Retention) Rules, 2005”. Rule 3 of the said Rules provides for manner of forwarding a copy of the order of provisional attachment of property along with the material under sub-section (2) of Section 5 of the Act to the Adjudicating Authority. Rule 3 stipulates various safeguards as to the confidentiality of the sealed envelope sent to the Adjudicating Authority.

32. Section 17 of PMLA deals with the search and seizure. Section 17 which deals with search and seizure states that where the Director or any other officer not below the rank of Deputy Director authorised by him for the purposes of this section on the basis of the information in his possession has “reason to believe” (reason for such belief to be recorded in writing) that any person has committed an offence which constitutes the money laundering or is in possession of any proceeds of crime involved in money laundering etc. may search building, place and seize any record or property found as a result of such search. Section 17 of PMLA also uses the expression “reason to believe” and “reason for such belief to be recorded in writing”. Here again, the authorised officer shall immediately on search and seizure or upon issuance of freezing order forward a copy of the reasons so recorded along with the material in his possession to the Adjudicating Authority in a “sealed envelope” in the manner as may be prescribed and such Adjudicating Authority shall keep such reasons and material for such period as may be prescribed. In order to ensure the sanctity of the search and seizure and to ensure the safeguards, in exercise of power under Section 73 of PMLA, the Central Government has framed “The Prevention of Money-Laundering (Forms, Search and Seizure or Freezing and the Manner of Forwarding the Reasons and Material to the Adjudicating Authority, Impounding and Custody of Records and the period of Retention) Rules, 2005”.

33. Section 19 of PMLA deals with the power of the specified officer to arrest. Under sub-section (1) of Section 19 of PMLA, the specified officer viz. the Director, the Deputy Director, Assistant Director or any other officer authorised in this behalf by the Central Government by general or special order, on the basis of the material in possession, having “reason to believe” and “reasons for such belief be recorded in writing” that the person has been guilty of offence punishable under the PMLA, has power to arrest such person. The authorised officer is required to inform the accused the grounds for such arrest at the earliest and in terms of sub- section (3) of Section 19 of the Act, the arrested person is required to be produced to the jurisdictional Judicial Magistrate or Metropolitan Magistrate within 24 hours excluding the journey time from the place of arrest to the Magistrate’s Court. In order to ensure the safeguards, in exercise of power under Section 73 of the Act, the Central Government has framed “The Prevention of Money-Laundering (The Forms and the Manner of Forwarding a Copy of Order of Arrest of a Person along with the Material to the Adjudicating Authority and its Period of Retention) Rules, 2005”. Rule 3 of the said Rules requires the arresting officer to forward a copy of order of arrest and the material to the Adjudicating Authority in a sealed cover marked “confidential” and Rule 3 provides for the manner in maintaining the confidentiality of the contents.

34. As rightly submitted by Mr. Tushar Mehta, the procedure under PMLA for arrest ensures sufficient safeguards viz.:- (i) only the specified officers are authorised to arrest; (ii) based on “reasons to believe” that an offence punishable under the Act has been committed; (iii) the reasons for such belief to be recorded in writing; (iv) evidence and the material submitted to the Adjudicating Authority in sealed envelope in the manner as may be prescribed ensuring the safeguards in maintaining the confidentiality; and

(v) every person arrested under PMLA to be produced before the Judicial Magistrate or Metropolitan Magistrate within 24 hours. Section 19 of PMLA provides for the power to arrest to the specified officer on the basis of material in his possession and has “reason to believe” and the “reasons for such belief to be recorded in writing” that any person has been guilty of an offence punishable under PMLA. The statutory power has been vested upon the specified officers of higher rank to arrest the person whom the officer has “reason to believe” that such person has been guilty of an offence punishable under PMLA. In cases of PMLA, in exercising the power to grant anticipatory bail would be to scuttle the statutory power of the specified officers to arrest which is enshrined in the statute with sufficient safeguards.

35. Section 71 of PMLA gives overriding effect to the provisions of PMLA. Section 71 of PMLA states that the provisions of the Act would have overriding effect on the provisions of all other Acts applicable. The provisions of PMLA shall prevail over the contrary provisions of the other Acts. Section 65 of PMLA states that the provisions of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 shall apply to the provisions under the Act insofar as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of PMLA.

36. Insofar as the issue of grant of bail is concerned, Section 45 of PMLA starts with non-obstante clause. Section 45 imposes two conditions for grant of bail to any person accused of any offence punishable for a term of imprisonment of more than three years under Part-A of the Schedule of the Act viz., (i) that the prosecutor must be given an opportunity to oppose the application for such bail; (ii) that the court must be satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for believing that the accused persons is not guilty of such offence and that he is not likely to commit any offence while on bail.

37. The twin conditions under Section 45(1) for the offences classified thereunder in Part-A of the Schedule was held arbitrary and discriminatory and invalid in Nikesh Tarachand Shah v. Union of India and another (2018) 11 SCC 1. Insofar as the twin conditions for release of accused on bail under Section 45 of the Act, the Supreme Court held the same to be unconstitutional as it violates Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution of India. Subsequently, Section 45 has been amended by Amendment Act 13 of 2008. The words “imprisonment for a term of imprisonment of more than three years under Part A of the Schedule” has been substituted with “accused of an offence under this Act…..”. Section 45 prior to Nikesh Tarachand and post Nikesh Tarachand reads as under:-

Section 45 - Prior to Nikesh Tarachand Shah Section 45 - Post Nikesh Tarachand Shah Section 45. Offence to be cognizable and non- Section 45. Offences to be cognizable and non-bailable. bailable. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of (1) Notwithstanding contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), no Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), no person accused of an offence under this Act shall person accused of an offence punishable be released on bail or on his own bond unless-
for a term of imprisonment of more than (i) the Public Prosecutor has been given an three years under Part A of the Schedule opportunity to oppose the application for such shall be released on bail or on his own release; and

(ii) where the Public Prosecutor opposes the bond unless-

(i) the Public Prosecutor has been given application, the court is satisfied that there are an opportunity to oppose the application reasonable grounds for believing that he is not for such release; and guilty of such offence and that he is not likely to

(ii) where the Public Prosecutor opposes commit any offence while on bail; the application, the court is satisfied that Provided that a person, who, is under the age of sixteen there are reasonable grounds for years, or is a woman or is sick or infirm, or is accused either believing that he is not guilty of such on his own or along with other co-accused of money offence and that he is not likely to laundering a sum of less than one crore rupees may be commit any offence while on bail; released on bail, if the Special court so directs:

Provided that a person, who, is under the age of sixteen years, or is a woman or is sick or infirm, may be released on bail, if the Special Court so directs:
38. The occurrence was of the year 2007-2008. CBI registered the case against Sh. Karti Chidambaram, the appellant and others on 15.05.2017 under Sections 120-B IPC read with Section 420 IPC and under Section 8 and Section 13(2) read with Section 13(1)(d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act. Learned Senior counsel for the appellant, Mr. A.M. Singhvi has submitted that there could not have been ‘reasons to believe’ that the appellant has committed the offence under Section 3 of PMLA, since in 2007-2008 the time of commission of alleged offence, Sections 120-B IPC and 420 IPC and Section 13 of the Prevention of Corruption Act were not there in Part ‘A’ of the Schedule to PMLA and were included in Part ‘A’ of the Schedule only by Amendment Act 21 of 2009 w.e.f. 01.06.2009 and w.e.f. 26.07.2018 respectively and therefore, no prima-facie case of commission of offence by the appellant under PMLA is made out. It was urged that under Article 20 of the Constitution, no person shall be convicted of any offence except for violation of law in force at the time of the commission of that act charged as offence. When Section 120B IPC and Section 420 IPC and Section 13 of Prevention of Corruption Act were not then included in Part A of the Schedule, in 2007-2008, then the appellant and others cannot be said to have committed the offence under PMLA.
Insofar as Section 8 of the Prevention of Corruption Act is concerned, it was submitted that Section 8 of the Prevention of Corruption Act is not attracted against the appellant as there are no allegations in the FIR that the appellant accepted or agreed to accept any gratification as a motive or reward for inducing any public servant and hence, the accusation under Section 8 of the Prevention of Corruption Act does not apply to the appellant. It was further submitted that even assuming Section 8 of the Prevention of Corruption Act is made out, the amount allegedly paid to ASCPL was only Rs.10,00,000/- whereas, Rs.30,00,000/- was the amount then stipulated to attract Section 8 to be the Scheduled offence under Part A of the Schedule to the Act and therefore, there was no basis for offence against the appellant and in such view of the matter, the appellant is entitled for anticipatory bail.

39. Section 45 of the PMLA makes the offence of money laundering cognizable and non-bailable and no person accused of an offence punishable for a term of imprisonment of more than three years under Part A of the Schedule shall be released on bail unless the twin conditions thereon are satisfied. Section 120-B IPC – Criminal Conspiracy and Section 420 IPC - Cheating and dishonestly inducing delivery of property were included in Part A of the Schedule to PMLA by way of Amendment Act 21 of 2009 w.e.f. 01.06.2009 and by way of Amendment Act 2 of 2013 w.e.f. 15.02.2013. Likewise, Section 13 of the Prevention of Corruption Act has been introduced to Part A of the Schedule (Paragraph 8) by way of Amendment Act 16 of 2018 w.e.f. 26.07.2018. As pointed out earlier, the FIR was registered by CBI under Section 8 of the Prevention of Corruption Act also which was then in Part A of the Schedule at the time of alleged commission of offence.

40. Learned Senior counsel submitted that since the offence under Sections 120-B IPC and 420 IPC and under Section 13 of Prevention of Corruption Act were included in the Schedule only w.e.f. 01.06.2009 and w.e.f. 26.07.2018 respectively and there can never be a retrospective operation of a criminal/penal statue and the test is not whether the proceeds are retained by the person; but the test as laid down by the Constitution Bench of this Court is, the test of the acts constituting the offence at the time of the commission of the offence and the appellant cannot be proceeded with prosecution under PMLA in violation of constitutional protection under Article 20(1) of the Constitution of India.

41. Under Article 20(1) of the Constitution, no person shall be convicted of any offence except for violation of law in force at the time of commission of that act charged as an offence. FIR for the predicate offence has been registered by CBI under Section 120B IPC, 420 IPC and Section 13 of the Prevention of Corruption Act and also under Section 8 of the Prevention of Corruption Act. As discussed earlier, Section 120B IPC and Section 420 IPC were included in Part A of the Schedule only by Amendment Act 21 of 2009 w.e.f. 01.06.2009. Section 13 of the Prevention of Corruption Act was included in Part A of the Schedule by Amendment Act 16 of 2018 w.e.f. 26.07.2018. Section 8 of the Prevention of Corruption Act is punishable with imprisonment extending upto seven years. Section 8 of the Prevention of Corruption Act was very much available in Part A of the Schedule of PMLA at the time of alleged commission of offence in 2007-2008. It cannot therefore be said that the appellant is proceeded against in violation of Article 20(1) of the Constitution of India for the alleged commission of the acts which was not an offence as per law then in existence. The merits of the contention that Section 8 of the Prevention of Corruption Act cannot be the predicate offence qua the appellant, cannot be gone into at this stage when this Court is only considering the prayer for anticipatory bail.

42. Yet another contention advanced on behalf of the appellant is that minimum threshold for the Enforcement Directorate to acquire jurisdiction at the relevant time was Rs.30 lakhs whereas, in the present case, there is no material to show any payment apart from the sum of Rs.10 lakhs (approximately) allegedly paid by INX Media to ASCPL with which the appellant is said to be having no connection whatsoever. The merits of the contention that Section 8 of the Prevention of Corruption Act (then included in Schedule A of the PMLA in 2007-08) whether attracted or not and whether the Enforcement Directorate had the threshold to acquire jurisdiction under PMLA cannot be considered at this stage while this Court is considering only the prayer for anticipatory bail.

43. In terms of Section 4 of the PMLA, the offence of money-laundering is punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term not less than three years extending to seven years and with fine. The Second Schedule to the Criminal Procedure Code relates to classification of offences against other laws and in terms of the Second Schedule of the Code, an offence which is punishable with imprisonment for three years and upward but not more than seven years is a cognizable and non-bailable offence. Thus, Section 4 of the Act read with the Second Schedule of the Code makes it clear that the offences under the PMLA are cognizable offences. As pointed out earlier, Section 8 of the Prevention of Corruption Act was then found a mention in Part ‘A’ of the Schedule (Paragraph 8). Section 8 of the Prevention of Corruption Act is punishable for a term extending to seven years. Thus, the essential requirement of Section 45 of PMLA “accused of an offence punishable for a term of imprisonment of more than three years under Part ‘A’ of the Schedule” is satisfied making the offence under PMLA. There is no merit in the contention of the appellant that very registration of the FIR against the appellant under PMLA is not maintainable.

Whether Court can look into the documents/materials collected during investigation

44. During the course of lengthy hearing, much arguments were advanced mainly on the question whether the court can look into the documents and materials produced by the prosecution before the court without first confronting the accused with those materials.

45. The learned Solicitor General submitted that during investigation, the Enforcement Directorate has collected materials and overseas banks have given specific inputs regarding the companies and properties that money has been parked in the name of shell companies and the said money has been used to make legitimate assets and that custodial interrogation is necessary with regard to the materials so collected. The learned Solicitor General sought to produce the materials so collected in the sealed cover and requested the court to peruse the documents and the materials to satisfy the conscience of the court as to the necessity for the custodial interrogation.

46. Contention of learned Solicitor General requesting the court to peruse the documents produced in the sealed cover was strongly objected by the appellant on the grounds :– (i) that the Enforcement Directorate cannot randomly place the documents in the court behind the back of the accused to seek custody of the accused; (ii) the materials so collected by Enforcement Directorate during investigation cannot be placed before the court unless the accused has been confronted with such materials.

47. Mr. Kapil Sibal, learned Senior counsel submitted that the statements recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C. are part of the case diary and the case diary must reflect day to day movement of the investigation based on which the investigating agency came to the conclusion that the crime has been committed so that a final report can be filed before the court. The learned Senior counsel submitted that during the course of such investigation, the investigating officer may discover several documents which may have a bearing on the crime committed; however the documents themselves can never be the part of the case diary and the documents would be a piece of documentary evidence during trial which would be required to be proved in accordance with the provisions of the Evidence Act before such documents can be relied upon for the purpose of supporting the case of prosecution. Enforcement Directorate does not maintain a case diary; but maintain the file with paginated pages. It was urged that even assuming that there is a case diary maintained by the respondent in conformity with Section 172 Cr.P.C., the opinion of the investigating officer for the conclusion reached by the authorised officer under PMLA, can never be relied upon for the purposes of consideration of anticipatory bail.

48. Having regard to the submissions, two points arise for consideration –

(i) whether the court can/cannot look into the documents/materials produced before the court unless the accused was earlier confronted with those documents/materials?; and (ii) whether the court is called upon to hold a mini inquiry during the intermediary stages of investigation by examining whether the questions put to the accused are ‘satisfactory’ or ‘evasive’, etc.?

49. Sub-section (2) of Section 172 Cr.P.C. permits any court to send for case diary to use them in the trial. Section 172(3) Cr.P.C. specifically provides that neither the accused nor his agents shall be entitled to call for case diary nor shall he or they be entitled to see them merely because they are referred to by the court. But if they are used by the police officer who made them to refresh his memory or if the court uses them for the purpose of contradicting the such police officer, the provisions of Section 161 Crl.P.C. or the provision of Section 145 of the Evidence Act shall be complied with. In this regard, the learned Solicitor General placed reliance upon Balakram v. State of Uttarakhand and others (2017) 7 SCC 668. Observing that the confidentiality is always kept in the matter of investigation and it is not desirable to make available the police diary to the accused on his demand, in Balakram, the Supreme Court held as under:-

“15. The police diary is only a record of day-to-day investigation made by the investigating officer. Neither the accused nor his agent is entitled to call for such case diary and also are not entitled to see them during the course of inquiry or trial. The unfettered power conferred by the statute under Section 172(2) CrPC on the court to examine the entries of the police diary would not allow the accused to claim similar unfettered right to inspect the case diary.
……….
17. From the aforementioned, it is clear that the denial of right to the accused to inspect the case diary cannot be characterised as unreasonable or arbitrary. The confidentiality is always kept in the matter of investigation and it is not desirable to make available the police diary to the accused on his demand.”
50. Reiterating the same principles in Sidharth and others v. State of Bihar (2005) 12 SCC 545, the Supreme Court held as under:-

“27. Lastly, we may point out that in the present case, we have noticed that the entire case diary maintained by the police was made available to the accused. Under Section 172 of the Criminal Procedure Code, every police officer making an investigation has to record his proceedings in a diary setting forth the time at which the information reached him, the time at which he began and closed his investigation, the place or places visited by him and a statement of the circumstances ascertained through his investigation. It is specifically provided in sub-clause (3) of Section 172 that neither the accused nor his agents shall be entitled to call for such diaries nor shall he or they be entitled to see them merely because they are referred to by the court, but if they are used by the police officer who made them to refresh his memory, or if the court uses them for the purpose of contradicting such police officer, the provisions of Section 161 CrPC or the provisions of Section 145 of the Evidence Act shall be complied with. The court is empowered to call for such diaries not to use it as evidence but to use it as aid to find out anything that happened during the investigation of the crime. These provisions have been incorporated in the Code of Criminal Procedure to achieve certain specific objectives. The police officer who is conducting the investigation may come across a series of information which cannot be divulged to the accused. He is bound to record such facts in the case diary. But if the entire case diary is made available to the accused, it may cause serious prejudice to others and even affect the safety and security of those who may have given statements to the police. The confidentiality is always kept in the matter of criminal investigation and it is not desirable to make available the entire case diary to the accused. In the instant case, we have noticed that the entire case diary was given to the accused and the investigating officer was extensively cross-examined on many facts which were not very much relevant for the purpose of the case. The learned Sessions Judge should have been careful in seeing that the trial of the case was conducted in accordance with the provisions of CrPC.” [underlining added] The same position has been reiterated in Naresh Kumar Yadav v. Ravindra Kumar and others (2008) 1 SCC 632 [Paras 11 to 14], Malkiat Singh and others v. State of Punjab (1991) 4 SCC 341 [Para 11] and other judgments.
51. It is seen from various judgments that on several instances, court always received and perused the case diaries/materials collected by the prosecution during investigation to satisfy itself as to whether the investigation is proceeding in the right direction or for consideration of the question of grant of bail etc. In Directorate of Enforcement and another v. P.V. Prabhakar Rao (1997) 6 SCC 647, the Supreme Court perused the records to examine the correctness of the order passed by the High Court granting bail. In R.K. Krishna Kumar v. State of Assam and others (1998) 1 SCC 474, the Supreme Court received court diary maintained under Section 172 Cr.P.C. and perused the case diary to satisfy itself that the investigation has revealed that the company thereon has funded the organisation (ULFA) and that the appellants thereon had a role to play in it. While considering the question of arrest of five well known human rights activists, journalists, advocates and political workers, in Romila Thapar and Others v. Union of India and Others (2018) 10 SCC 753, this Court perused the registers containing relevant documents and the case diary produced by the State of Maharashtra. However, the court avoided to dilate on the factual position emerging therefrom on the ground that any observation made thereon might cause prejudice to the accused or to the prosecution in any manner. Upholding the validity of Section 172(3) Crl.P.C. and observing that “there can be no better custodian or guardian of the interest of justice than the court trying the case”, in Mukund Lal v. Union of India and another 1989 Supp. (1) SCC 622, the Supreme Court held as under:-

3. …..
“So far as the other parts are concerned, the accused need not necessarily have a right of access to them because in a criminal trial or enquiry, whatever is sought to be proved against the accused, will have to be proved by the evidence other than the diary itself and the diary can only be used for a very limited purpose by the court or the police officer as stated above. ………. When in the enquiry or trial, everything which may appear against the accused has to be established and brought before the court by evidence other than the diary and the accused can have the benefit of cross-examining the witnesses and the court has power to call for the diary and use it, of course not as evidence but in aid of the enquiry or trial, I am clearly of the opinion, that the provisions under Section 172(3) CrPC cannot be said to be unconstitutional.” We fully endorse the reasoning of the High Court and concur with its conclusion. We are of the opinion that the provision embodied in sub-section (3) of Section 172 of the CrPC cannot be characterised as unreasonable or arbitrary. Under sub-section (2) of Section 172 CrPC the court itself has the unfettered power to examine the entries in the diaries. This is a very important safeguard. The legislature has reposed complete trust in the court which is conducting the inquiry or the trial. It has empowered the court to call for any such relevant case diary; if there is any inconsistency or contradiction arising in the context of the case diary the court can use the entries for the purpose of contradicting the police officer as provided in sub- section (3) of Section 172 of the CrPC. Ultimately there can be no better custodian or guardian of the interest of justice than the court trying the case. No court will deny to itself the power to make use of the entries in the diary to the advantage of the accused by contradicting the police officer with reference to the contents of the diaries. In view of this safeguard, the charge of unreasonableness or arbitrariness cannot stand scrutiny. ……. Public interest demands that such an entry is not made available to the accused for it might endanger the safety of the informants and it might deter the informants from giving any information to assist the investigating agency, …….” [underlining added]

52. So far as the production of the case diary during trial and reference to the same by the court and the interdict against accused to call for case diary is governed by Section 172 Cr.P.C. As per sub-section (3) of Section 172, neither the accused nor his agent is entitled to call for such case diaries and also not entitled to see them during the course of enquiry or trial. The case diaries can be used for refreshing memory by the investigating officer and court can use it for the purpose of contradicting such police officer as per provisions of Section 161 or Section 145 of the Indian Evidence Act. Unless the investigating officer or the court so uses the case diary either to refresh the memory or for contradicting the investigating officer as previous statement under Section 161, after drawing his attention under Section 145, the entries in case diary cannot be used by the accused as evidence (vide Section 172(3) Cr.P.C.).

53. It is well-settled that the court can peruse the case diary/materials collected during investigation by the prosecution even before the commencement of the trial inter-alia in circumstances like:- (i) to satisfy its conscience as to whether the investigation is proceeding in the right direction; (ii) to satisfy itself that the investigation has been conducted in the right lines and that there is no misuse or abuse of process in the investigation; (iii) whether regular or anticipatory bail is to be granted to the accused or not; (iv) whether any further custody of the accused is required for the prosecution; (v) to satisfy itself as to the correctness of the decision of the High Court/trial court which is under challenge. The above instances are only illustrative and not exhaustive. Where the interest of justice requires, the court has the powers, to receive the case diary/materials collected during the investigation. As held in Mukund Lal, ultimately there can be no better custodian or guardian of the interest of justice than the court trying the case. Needless to point out that when the Court has received and perused the documents/materials, it is only for the purpose of satisfaction of court’s conscience. In the initial stages of investigation, the Court may not extract or verbatim refer to the materials which the Court has perused (as has been done in this case by the learned Single Judge) and make observations which might cause serious prejudice to the accused in trial and other proceedings resulting in miscarriage of justice.

54. The Enforcement Directorate has produced the sealed cover before us containing the materials collected during investigation and the same was received. Vide order dated 29.08.2019, we have stated that the receipt of the sealed cover would be subject to our finding whether the court can peruse the materials or not. As discussed earlier, we have held that the court can receive the materials/documents collected during the investigation and peruse the same to satisfy its conscience that the investigation is proceeding in the right lines and for the purpose of consideration of grant of bail/anticipatory bail etc. In the present case, though sealed cover was received by this Court, we have consciously refrained from opening the sealed cover and perusing the documents. Lest, if we peruse the materials collected by the respondent and make some observations thereon, it might cause prejudice to the appellant and the other co-accused who are not before this court when they are to pursue the appropriate relief before various forum. Suffice to note that at present, we are only at the stage of considering the pre-arrest bail. Since according to the respondent, they have collected documents/materials for which custodial interrogation of the appellant is necessary, which we deem appropriate to accept the submission of the respondent for the limited purpose of refusing pre-arrest bail to the appellant.

55. Of course, while considering the request for anticipatory bail and while perusing the materials/note produced by the Enforcement Directorate/CBI, the learned Single Judge could have satisfied his conscience to hold that it is not a fit case for grant of anticipatory bail. On the other hand, the learned Single Judge has verbatim quoted the note produced by the respondent- Enforcement Directorate. The learned Single Judge, was not right in extracting the note produced by the Enforcement Directorate/CBI which in our view, is not a correct approach for consideration of grant/refusal of anticipatory bail. But such incorrect approach of the learned Single Judge, in our view, does not affect the correctness of the conclusion in refusing to grant of anticipatory bail to the appellant in view of all other aspects considered herein.

Re: Contention:- The appellant should have been confronted with the materials collected by the Enforcement Directorate earlier, before being produced to the court.


56. On behalf of the appellant, it was contended that the materials produced by the Enforcement Directorate could have never been relied upon for the purpose of consideration of anticipatory bail unless the appellant was earlier confronted with those documents/materials. It was submitted that if the appellant’s response was completely “evasive” and “non co-operative” during the three days when he was interrogated i.e. 19.12.2018, 01.01.2019 and 21.01.2019, the respondent should place before the court the materials put to the appellant and the responses elicited from the accused to demonstrate to the court that “the accused was completely evasive and non-co-operative”.

57. Contention of the appellant that the court will have to scrutinise the questions put to the accused during interrogation and answers given by the appellant and satisfy itself whether the answers were “evasive or not”, would amount to conducting “mini trial” and substituting court’s view over the view of the investigating agency about the “cooperation” or “evasiveness” of the accused and thereafter, the court to decide the questions of grant of anticipatory bail. This contention is far-fetched and does not merit acceptance.

58. As rightly submitted by learned Solicitor General that if the accused are to be confronted with the materials which were collected by the prosecution/Enforcement Directorate with huge efforts, it would lead to devastating consequences and would defeat the very purpose of the investigation into crimes, in particular, white collar offences. If the contention of the appellant is to be accepted, the investigating agency will have to question each and every accused such materials collected during investigation and in this process, the investigating agency would be exposing the evidence collected by them with huge efforts using their men and resources and this would give a chance to the accused to tamper with the evidence and to destroy the money trail apart from paving the way for the accused to influence the witnesses. If the contention of the appellant is to be accepted that the accused will have to be questioned with the materials and the investigating agency has to satisfy the court that the accused was “evasive” during interrogation, the court will have to undertake a “mini trial” of scrutinizing the matter at intermediary stages of investigation like interrogation of the accused and the answers elicited from the accused and to find out whether the answers given by the accused are ‘evasive’ or whether they are ‘satisfactory’ or not. This could have never been the intention of the legislature either under PMLA or any other statute.

59. Interrogation of the accused and the answers elicited from the accused and the opinion whether the answers given by the accused are “satisfactory” or “evasive”, is purely within the domain of the investigating agency and the court cannot substitute its views by conducting mini trial at various stages of the investigation.

60. The investigation of a cognizable offence and the various stages thereon including the interrogation of the accused is exclusively reserved for the investigating agency whose powers are unfettered so long as the investigating officer exercises his investigating powers well within the provisions of the law and the legal bounds. In exercise of its inherent power under Section 482 Cr.P.C., the court can interfere and issue appropriate direction only when the court is convinced that the power of the investigating officer is exercised mala fide or where there is abuse of power and non-compliance of the provisions of Code of Criminal Procedure. However, this power of invoking inherent jurisdiction to issue direction and interfering with the investigation is exercised only in rare cases where there is abuse of process or non-compliance of the provisions of Criminal Procedure Code.

61. In King-Emperor v. Khwaja Nazir Ahmad AIR 1945 PC 18 : 1944 SCC Online PC 29, it was held as under:-

“…..it is of the utmost importance that the judiciary should not interfere with the police in matters which are within their province and into which the law imposes upon them the duty of enquiry.
In India as has been shown there is a statutory right on the part of the police to investigate the circumstances of an alleged cognizable crime without requiring any authority from the judicial authorities, and it would, as their Lordships think, be an unfortunate result if it should be held possible to interfere with those statutory rights by an exercise of the inherent jurisdiction of the Court. The functions of the judiciary and the police are complementary not overlapping and the combination of individual liberty with a due observance of law and order is only to be obtained by leaving each to exercise its own function, always, of course, subject to the right of the Court to intervene in an appropriate case when moved under S. 491 of the Crl. P.C. ….” [underlining added]
62. The above decision in Khwaja Nazir Ahmad has been quoted with approval by the Supreme Court in Abhinandan Jha and others v. Dinesh Mishra AIR 1968 SC 117 and State of Bihar and another v. J.A.C. Saldanha and others (1980) 1 SCC 554. Observing that the investigation of the offence is the field exclusively reserved for the executive through the police department and the superintendence over which vests in the State Government, in J.A.C. Saldanha, it was held as under:-

“25. There is a clear-cut and well demarcated sphere of activity in the field of crime detection and crime punishment. Investigation of an offence is the field exclusively reserved for the executive through the police department the superintendence over which vests in the State Government. The executive which is charged with a duty to keep vigilance over law and order situation is obliged to prevent crime and if an offence is alleged to have been committed it is its bounded duty to investigate into the offence and bring the offender to book. Once it investigates and finds an offence having been committed it is its duty to collect evidence for the purpose of proving the offence. Once that is completed and the investigating officer submits report to the court requesting the court to take cognizance of the offence under Section 190 of the Code its duty comes to an end. On a cognizance of the offence being taken by the court the police function of investigation comes to an end subject to the provision contained in Section 173(8), there commences the adjudicatory function of the judiciary to determine whether an offence has been committed and if so, whether by the person or persons charged with the crime by the police in its report to the court, and to award adequate punishment according to law for the offence proved to the satisfaction of the court. There is thus a well defined and well demarcated function in the field of crime detection and its subsequent adjudication between the police and the Magistrate. This had been recognised way back in King Emperor v. Khwaja Nazir Ahmad AIR 1944 PC 18 ……...”.
The same view was reiterated in Dukhishyam Benupani, Asstt. Director, Enforcement Directorate (FERA) v. Arun Kumar Bajoria (1998) 1 SCC 52, M.C. Abraham and Another v. State of Maharashtra and Others (2003) 2 SCC 649, Subramanian Swamy v. Director, Central Bureau of Investigation and another (2014) 8 SCC 682 and Divine Retreat Centre v. State of Kerala and Others (2008) 3 SCC 542.
63. Investigation into crimes is the prerogative of the police and excepting in rare cases, the judiciary should keep out all the areas of investigation. In State of Bihar and another v. P.P. Sharma, IAS and another 1992 Supp. (1) 222, it was held that “The investigating officer is an arm of the law and plays a pivotal role in the dispensation of criminal justice and maintenance of law and order. …..Enough power is therefore given to the police officer in the area of investigating process and granting them the court latitude to exercise its discretionary power to make a successful investigation…”. In Dukhishyam Benupani, Asstt. Director, Enforcement Directorate (FERA) v. Arun Kumar Bajoria (1998) 1 SCC 52, this Court held that “……it is not the function of the court to monitor investigation processes so long as such investigation does not transgress any provision of law. It must be left to the investigating agency to decide the venue, the timings and the questions and the manner of putting such questions to persons involved in such offences. A blanket order fully insulating a person from arrest would make his interrogation a mere ritual.”

64. As held by the Supreme Court in a catena of judgments that there is a well-defined and demarcated function in the field of investigation and its subsequent adjudication. It is not the function of the court to monitor the investigation process so long as the investigation does not violate any provision of law. It must be left to the discretion of the investigating agency to decide the course of investigation. If the court is to interfere in each and every stage of the investigation and the interrogation of the accused, it would affect the normal course of investigation. It must be left to the investigating agency to proceed in its own manner in interrogation of the accused, nature of questions put to him and the manner of interrogation of the accused.

65. It is one thing to say that if the power of investigation has been exercised by an investigating officer mala fide or non-compliance of the provisions of the Criminal Procedure Code in the conduct of the investigation, it is open to the court to quash the proceedings where there is a clear case of abuse of power. It is a different matter that the High Court in exercise of its inherent power under Section 482 Cr.P.C., the court can always issue appropriate direction at the instance of an aggrieved person if the High Court is convinced that the power of investigation has been exercised by the investigating officer mala fide and not in accordance with the provisions of the Criminal Procedure Code. However, as pointed out earlier that power is to be exercised in rare cases where there is a clear abuse of power and non-compliance of the provisions falling under Chapter-XII of the Code of Criminal Procedure requiring the interference of the High Court. In the initial stages of investigation where the court is considering the question of grant of regular bail or pre-arrest bail, it is not for the court to enter into the demarcated function of the investigation and collection of evidence/materials for establishing the offence and interrogation of the accused and the witnesses.

66. Whether direction to produce the transcripts could be issued:-

Contention of the appellant is that it has not been placed before the court as to what were the questions/aspects on which the appellant was interrogated on 19.12.2018, 01.01.2019 and 21.01.2019 and the Enforcement Directorate has not been able to show as to how the answers given by the appellant are “evasive”. It was submitted that the investigating agency-Enforcement Directorate cannot expect the accused to give answers in the manner they want and the investigating agency should always keep in their mind the rights of the accused protected under Article 20(3) of the Constitution of India. Since the interrogation of the accused and the questions put to the accused and the answers given by the accused are part of the investigation which is purely within the domain of the investigation officer, unless satisfied that the police officer has improperly and illegally exercised his investigating powers in breach of any statutory provision, the court cannot interfere. In the present case, no direction could be issued to the respondent to produce the transcripts of the questions put to the appellant and answers given by the appellant.
Grant of Anticipatory bail in exceptional cases:-
67. Ordinarily, arrest is a part of procedure of the investigation to secure not only the presence of the accused but several other purposes. Power under Section 438 Cr.P.C. is an extraordinary power and the same has to be exercised sparingly. The privilege of the pre-arrest bail should be granted only in exceptional cases. The judicial discretion conferred upon the court has to be properly exercised after application of mind as to the nature and gravity of the accusation; possibility of applicant fleeing justice and other factors to decide whether it is a fit case for grant of anticipatory bail. Grant of anticipatory bail to some extent interferes in the sphere of investigation of an offence and hence, the court must be circumspect while exercising such power for grant of anticipatory bail. Anticipatory bail is not to be granted as a matter of rule and it has to be granted only when the court is convinced that exceptional circumstances exist to resort to that extraordinary remedy.

68. On behalf of the appellant, much arguments were advanced contending that anticipatory bail is a facet of Article 21 of the Constitution of India. It was contended that unless custodial interrogation is warranted, in the facts and circumstances of the case, denial of anticipatory bail would amount to denial of the right conferred upon the appellant under Article 21 of the Constitution of India.

69. Article 21 of the Constitution of India states that no person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty except according to procedure prescribed by law. However, the power conferred by Article 21 of the Constitution of India is not unfettered and is qualified by the later part of the Article i.e. “…except according to a procedure prescribed by law.” In State of M.P. and another v. Ram Kishna Balothia and another (1995) 3 SCC 221, the Supreme Court held that the right of anticipatory bail is not a part of Article 21 of the Constitution of India and held as under:-

“7. ……We find it difficult to accept the contention that Section 438 of the Code of Criminal Procedure is an integral part of Article 21. In the first place, there was no provision similar to Section 438 in the old Criminal Procedure Code. The Law Commission in its 41st Report recommended introduction of a provision for grant of anticipatory bail. It observed:
“We agree that this would be a useful advantage. Though we must add that it is in very exceptional cases that such power should be exercised.” In the light of this recommendation, Section 438 was incorporated, for the first time, in the Criminal Procedure Code of 1973. Looking to the cautious recommendation of the Law Commission, the power to grant anticipatory bail is conferred only on a Court of Session or the High Court. Also, anticipatory bail cannot be granted as a matter of right. It is essentially a statutory right conferred long after the coming into force of the Constitution. It cannot be considered as an essential ingredient of Article 21 of the Constitution. And its non-application to a certain special category of offences cannot be considered as violative of Article 21.” [underlining added]
70. We are conscious of the fact that the legislative intent behind the introduction of Section 438 Cr.P.C. is to safeguard the individual’s personal liberty and to protect him from the possibility of being humiliated and from being subjected to unnecessary police custody. However, the court must also keep in view that a criminal offence is not just an offence against an individual, rather the larger societal interest is at stake. Therefore, a delicate balance is required to be established between the two rights - safeguarding the personal liberty of an individual and the societal interest. It cannot be said that refusal to grant anticipatory bail would amount to denial of the rights conferred upon the appellant under Article 21 of the Constitution of India.

71. The learned Solicitor General has submitted that depending upon the facts of each case, it is for the investigating agency to confront the accused with the material, only when the accused is in custody. It was submitted that the statutory right under Section 19 of PMLA has an in-built safeguard against arbitrary exercise of power of arrest by the investigating officer. Submitting that custodial interrogation is a recognised mode of interrogation which is not only permissible but has been held to be more effective, the learned Solicitor General placed reliance upon State Rep. By The CBI v. Anil Sharma (1997) 7 SCC 187; Sudhir v. State of Maharashtra and Another (2016) 1 SCC 146; and Assistant Director, Directorate of Enforcement v. Hassan Ali Khan (2011) 12 SCC 684.

72. Ordinarily, arrest is a part of the process of the investigation intended to secure several purposes. There may be circumstances in which the accused may provide information leading to discovery of material facts and relevant information. Grant of anticipatory bail may hamper the investigation. Pre-arrest bail is to strike a balance between the individual’s right to personal freedom and the right of the investigating agency to interrogate the accused as to the material so far collected and to collect more information which may lead to recovery of relevant information. In State Rep. By The CBI v. Anil Sharma (1997) 7 SCC 187, the Supreme Court held as under:-

“6. We find force in the submission of the CBI that custodial interrogation is qualitatively more elicitation-oriented than questioning a suspect who is well ensconced with a favourable order under Section 438 of the Code. In a case like this effective interrogation of a suspected person is of tremendous advantage in disinterring many useful informations and also materials which would have been concealed. Success in such interrogation would elude if the suspected person knows that he is well protected and insulated by a pre-arrest bail order during the time he is interrogated. Very often interrogation in such a condition would reduce to a mere ritual. The argument that the custodial interrogation is fraught with the danger of the person being subjected to third-degree methods need not be countenanced, for, such an argument can be advanced by all accused in all criminal cases. The Court has to presume that responsible police officers would conduct themselves in a responsible manner and that those entrusted with the task of disinterring offences would not conduct themselves as offenders.”
73. Observing that the arrest is a part of the investigation intended to secure several purposes, in Adri Dharan Das v. State of W.B. (2005) 4 SCC 303, it was held as under:-

“19. Ordinarily, arrest is a part of the process of investigation intended to secure several purposes. The accused may have to be questioned in detail regarding various facets of motive, preparation, commission and aftermath of the crime and the connection of other persons, if any, in the crime. There may be circumstances in which the accused may provide information leading to discovery of material facts. It may be necessary to curtail his freedom in order to enable the investigation to proceed without hindrance and to protect witnesses and persons connected with the victim of the crime, to prevent his disappearance, to maintain law and order in the locality. For these or other reasons, arrest may become an inevitable part of the process of investigation. The legality of the proposed arrest cannot be gone into in an application under Section 438 of the Code. The role of the investigator is well defined and the jurisdictional scope of interference by the court in the process of investigation is limited. The court ordinarily will not interfere with the investigation of a crime or with the arrest of the accused in a cognizable offence. An interim order restraining arrest, if passed while dealing with an application under Section 438 of the Code will amount to interference in the investigation, which cannot, at any rate, be done under Section 438 of the Code.”
74. In Siddharam Satlingappa Mhetre v. State of Maharashtra and Others (2011) 1 SCC 694, the Supreme Court laid down the factors and parameters to be considered while dealing with anticipatory bail. It was held that the nature and the gravity of the accusation and the exact role of the accused must be properly comprehended before arrest is made and that the court must evaluate the available material against the accused very carefully. It was also held that the court should also consider whether the accusations have been made only with the object of injuring or humiliating the applicant by arresting him or her.

75. After referring to Siddharam Satlingappa Mhetre and other judgments and observing that anticipatory bail can be granted only in exceptional circumstances, in Jai Prakash Singh v. State of Bihar and another (2012) 4 SCC 379, the Supreme Court held as under:-

“19. Parameters for grant of anticipatory bail in a serious offence are required to be satisfied and further while granting such relief, the court must record the reasons therefor. Anticipatory bail can be granted only in exceptional circumstances where the court is prima facie of the view that the applicant has falsely been enroped in the crime and would not misuse his liberty. (See D.K. Ganesh Babu v. P.T. Manokaran (2007) 4 SCC 434, State of Maharashtra v. Mohd. Sajid Husain Mohd. S. Husain (2008) 1 SCC 213 and Union of India v. Padam Narain Aggarwal (2008) 13 SCC 305.)” Economic Offences:-
76. Power under Section 438 Cr.P.C. being an extraordinary remedy, has to be exercised sparingly; more so, in cases of economic offences. Economic offences stand as a different class as they affect the economic fabric of the society. In Directorate of Enforcement v. Ashok Kumar Jain (1998) 2 SCC 105, it was held that in economic offences, the accused is not entitled to anticipatory bail.


77. The learned Solicitor General submitted that the “Scheduled offence” and “offence of money laundering” are independent of each other and PMLA being a special enactment applicable to the offence of money laundering is not a fit case for grant of anticipatory bail. The learned Solicitor General submitted that money laundering being an economic offence committed with much planning and deliberate design poses a serious threat to the nation’s economy and financial integrity and in order to unearth the laundering and trail of money, custodial interrogation of the appellant is necessary.


78. Observing that economic offence is committed with deliberate design with an eye on personal profit regardless to the consequence to the community, in State of Gujarat v. Mohanlal Jitamalji Porwal and others (1987) 2 SCC 364, it was held as under:-

“5. ….The entire community is aggrieved if the economic offenders who ruin the economy of the State are not brought to book. A murder may be committed in the heat of moment upon passions being aroused. An economic offence is committed with cool calculation and deliberate design with an eye on personal profit regardless of the consequence to the community. A disregard for the interest of the community can be manifested only at the cost of forfeiting the trust and faith of the community in the system to administer justice in an even-handed manner without fear of criticism from the quarters which view white collar crimes with a permissive eye unmindful of the damage done to the national economy and national interest…..”
79. Observing that economic offences constitute a class apart and need to be visited with different approach in the matter of bail, in Y.S. Jagan Mohan Reddy v. CBI (2013) 7 SCC 439, the Supreme Court held as under:-

“34. Economic offences constitute a class apart and need to be visited with a different approach in the matter of bail. The economic offences having deep-rooted conspiracies and involving huge loss of public funds need to be viewed seriously and considered as grave offences affecting the economy of the country as a whole and thereby posing serious threat to the financial health of the country.
35. While granting bail, the court has to keep in mind the nature of accusations, the nature of evidence in support thereof, the severity of the punishment which conviction will entail, the character of the accused, circumstances which are peculiar to the accused, reasonable possibility of securing the presence of the accused at the trial, reasonable apprehension of the witnesses being tampered with, the larger interests of the public/State and other similar considerations.” [underlining added]
80. Referring to Dukhishyam Benupani, Assistant Director, Enforcement Directorate (FERA) v. Arun Kumar Bajoria (1998) 1 SCC 52, in Enforcement Officer, Ted, Bombay v. Bher Chand Tikaji Bora and others (1999) 5 SCC 720, while hearing an appeal by the Enforcement Directorate against the order of the Single Judge of the Bombay High Court granting anticipatory bail to the respondent thereon, the Supreme Court set aside the order of the Single Judge granting anticipatory bail.

81. Grant of anticipatory bail at the stage of investigation may frustrate the investigating agency in interrogating the accused and in collecting the useful information and also the materials which might have been concealed. Success in such interrogation would elude if the accused knows that he is protected by the order of the court. Grant of anticipatory bail, particularly in economic offences would definitely hamper the effective investigation. Having regard to the materials said to have been collected by the respondent-Enforcement Directorate and considering the stage of the investigation, we are of the view that it is not a fit case to grant anticipatory bail.


82. In a case of money-laundering where it involves many stages of “placement”, “layering i.e. funds moved to other institutions to conceal origin” and “interrogation i.e. funds used to acquire various assets”, it requires systematic and analysed investigation which would be of great advantage. As held in Anil Sharma, success in such interrogation would elude if the accused knows that he is protected by a pre-arrest bail order. Section 438 Cr.P.C. is to be invoked only in exceptional cases where the case alleged is frivolous or groundless. In the case in hand, there are allegations of laundering the proceeds of the crime. The Enforcement Directorate claims to have certain specific inputs from various sources, including overseas banks. Letter rogatory is also said to have been issued and some response have been received by the department. Having regard to the nature of allegations and the stage of the investigation, in our view, the investigating agency has to be given sufficient freedom in the process of investigation. Though we do not endorse the approach of the learned Single Judge in extracting the note produced by the Enforcement Directorate, we do not find any ground warranting interference with the impugned order. Considering the facts and circumstances of the case, in our view, grant of anticipatory bail to the appellant will hamper the investigation and this is not a fit case for exercise of discretion to grant anticipatory bail to the appellant.


83. In the result, the appeal is dismissed. It is for the appellant to work out his remedy in accordance with law. As and when the application for regular bail is filed, the same shall be considered by the learned trial court on its own merits and in accordance with law without being influenced by any of the observations made in this judgment and the impugned order of the High Court.


…………………………..J. [R. BANUMATHI] …………………………..J. [A.S. BOPANNA] New Delhi;

September 05, 2019 
================================================================================


================================================================================
CASE 2:
[Cites 29, Cited by 353]
Supreme Court of India
M/S Thermax Ltd.& Ors vs K.M.Johny & Ors on 27 September, 2011
Equivalent citations: 2011 AIR SCW 5952, (2012) 110 ALLINDCAS 10(2) (SC), 2012 (1) AIR BOM R 99, (2012) 1 MADLW(CRI) 367, (2011) 2 CRILR(RAJ) 869, (2012) 1 MAD LJ(CRI) 393, 2011 CRILR(SC MAH GUJ) 869, (2012) 2 CGLJ 541, (2012) 1 ALD(CRL) 655, (2012) 76 ALLCRIC 774, 2011 CRILR(SC&MP) 869, (2011) 4 RECCRIR 409, 2011 (13) SCC 412, (2011) 11 SCALE 128, 2011 ALLMR(CRI) 3603, (2011) 4 DLT(CRL) 843, (2011) 4 CURCRIR 381, (2012) 1 ALLCRIR 399, (2011) 4 CHANDCRIC 151, (2011) 3 UC 2049, (2011) 50 OCR 616, (2011) 4 CRIMES 179, 2012 (2) SCC (CRI) 650, 2011 (4) KLT SN 96 (SC)
Author: P. Sathasivam
Bench: B.S. Chauhan, P. Sathasivam
                                                                         REPORTABLE

      

                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA


                  CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.  1868   OF 2011

               (Arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 590 of 2008





M/s Thermax Ltd. & Ors.                                   .... Appellant(s)



                Versus



K.M. Johny & Ors.                                         .... Respondent(s)





                               J U D G M E N T 
P. Sathasivam, J.

1)        Leave granted.



2)        This   appeal   is   directed   against   the   final   judgment   and 



order dated 11.01.2008 passed by the High Court of Judicature at Bombay in Criminal Writ Petition No. 1622 of 2007 wherein the Division Bench of the High Court dismissed the writ petition filed by the appellants herein as misconceived.

3)     Brief Facts:


(a)    M/s   Thermax   Ltd.-the   appellant-Company,   is   a   Public 



Limited Company having its registered office at Chinchwad, Pune and is engaged in the field of energy and environment management. Mr. K.M. Johny-the original complainant, Respondent No. 1 herein, is the proprietor of M/s Rini Engineers and M/s Sherly Engineers, which are small-scale industries undertaking fabrication job work for the appellant Company for the past several years.

(b) On 26.05.1995, the appellant-Company placed three Purchase Orders on Respondent No.1 being Order No. 260062 for designing and manufacturing two numbers of stationary L.P.G. Storage Tanks and Order Nos. 260063 and 260064 were for the supply of consumables and other accessories to the said Tanks. On 01.06.1995, M/s Unique Engineering Services, the Consultants of the appellant Company addressed a letter specifying that they had assessed the companies of the Respondent No. 1 and in their opinion even though they have not made any static bullets and have made quite a few mobile  L.P.G. Tanks, however, they were capable of manufacturing the same, but needed design help.

(c) On 20.06.1995, Respondent No. 1 informed the appellant-Company their inability to procure the material (steel) and requested to supply the same and to deduct the material cost from the final bill. On 04.08.1995, the Respondent No. 1 was provided with the necessary steel of the technical specification. On 06.08.1995, an Engineer of the appellant-Company visited the company of the Respondent No. 1 and submitted a report stating that Respondent No. 1 had carried out certain work using the material purchased from the appellant-Company. It was also pointed out in the report that Respondent No. 1 agreed that they would send the material to M/s Bureau Veritas for checking. The report also stated that Respondent No. 1 had not ordered for consumables and no rectification and drawings had been carried out.

(d) By letter dated 10.08.1995, the Consultants informed the appellant-Company that there was no progress in the work status for the last 45 days and it was observed that Respondent No. 1 was not interested in executing the  assignment. In pursuance of the same, a meeting was held between the officials of both the Companies and the Respondent No. 1 agreed to complete the job by all means by 22.09.1995. Since Respondent No. 1 failed to carry out the work as per the Schedule, the appellant-Company, vide letter dated 13.09.1995 cancelled the order placed and it was made effective from 26.05.1995 i.e., from the date when the order was placed.

(e) On 06.05.2000, Respondent No. 1 filed a complaint with the Crime Branch, Pune alleging that they had carried out several fabrication job works for the appellant-Company and huge amount of Rs. 91,95,054/- was outstanding till date despite several requests. In the said complaint, it was further alleged that the appellant-Company also placed Purchase Order being No. 240307 dated 22.03.1993 for Rs. 8,00,000/-

for fabrication and erection of Tower Support Structural etc., for the Mehasana District Taluka Sanstha (Gujarat) Project and also represented that they will hire the machinery of the Respondent No. 1 for the said job at the rate of Rs. 2,400/- per day and believing the same the Respondent No. 1 allegedly  purchased brand new machinery worth Rs. 5,80,000/-

specially for the said project and dispatched the same to the Mehasana site. Respondent No. 1 completed the said job according to schedule and to the satisfaction of the appellant-

Company and also carried out additional work at the site as per their request. It was alleged that balance outstanding for the said work of Rs.2,47,570/- was still receivable from the appellant-Company. An amount of Rs.58,32,000/- towards hiring charges for the machinery is yet to be paid by the appellant-Company. Therefore, a total sum of Rs.68,79,750/-

became due from the appellant-Company to respondent No.1 and the same was not paid till date. Since the Crime Branch did not take any cognizance, the said complaint was filed in the Court of Judicial Magistrate, First Class, Pimpri being RCC No. 12 of 2002 and by order dated 30.05.2002, the Judicial Magistrate issued a direction under Section 156(3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (in short `the Code') and referred the same to Crime Branch, Pune, Respondent No. 2 herein, for investigation. Pursuant to the same, Respondent No. 2  registered an offence being C.R. No. 91/2002 and initiated proceedings thereunder against the appellant-Company.

(f) Aggrieved by the said order, the appellant-Company filed two separate Criminal Writ Petitions being Nos. 209 and 443 of 2003 before the Bombay High Court for quashing and setting aside the order dated 30.05.2002 passed by the Judicial Magistrate, First Class, Pimpri. Vide order dated 10.06.2003, the High Court set aside the order dated 30.05.2002 and remitted the matter back to the Judicial Magistrate for reconsideration of the entire prayer and to decide the case afresh, after giving adequate opportunity of hearing to both the sides. Pursuant to the same, the appellant Company preferred an application dated 16.07.2003 under Section 91 of the Code before the Judicial Magistrate praying that the Assistant Commissioner of Police, Crime Branch, Pune City be directed to produce all the records and proceedings of the complaint dated 06.05.2000. After hearing the respective parties, the Judicial Magistrate, vide order dated 11.08.2003 rejected the said application.

(g) Aggrieved by the same, the appellant-Company preferred Criminal Application No. 3666 of 2003 before the High Court.

The High Court, vide order dated 18.10.2006, issued rule and interim relief by directing the Assistant Commissioner of Police, Crime Branch-II, Pune city to produce the documents within six weeks in the Court of Judicial Magistrate, Pimpri.

Pursuant to the said direction, Shri S.B Oahal, Inspector of Police, submitted a reply dated 12.03.2007 stating that the records and proceedings in respect of Crime Register No. 11 of 2000 were destroyed. Pursuant to the same, the Judicial Magistrate, vide order dated 20.08.2007, called for a report under Section 156(3) of the Code from the Respondent No. 2.

(h) Being aggrieved, the appellant-Company preferred Criminal Writ Petition being No. 1622 of 2007 before the High Court. The High Court, vide order dated 11.01.2008, dismissed the writ petition as misconceived on the ground that the Magistrate has adhered to the directions and has given reasons for coming to his conclusion. Aggrieved by the said decision, the appellant-Company has preferred this appeal before this Court by way of special leave petition.

4) Heard Dr. A.M. Singhvi and Mr. C.S. Vaidyanathan, learned senior counsel for the appellant-Company and Mr. K.T.S. Tulsi, learned senior counsel for the respondent No.1.

Contentions:

5) Dr. A.M. Singhvi, learned senior counsel for the appellant/accused, after taking us through all the earlier complaints including the last complaint and earlier orders closing those complaints, the order of the Judicial Magistrate, First Class, Pimpri dated 20.08.2007 in Criminal Case No. 12 of 2002 and the impugned order of the High Court dated 11.01.2008, at the outset, submitted that the courts below ought to have considered that the dispute arose out of a contract and a constituted remedy is only before a civil court.
He further contended that similar claim on earlier occasions were indeed investigated and finally categorized as civil in nature, while such is the position, the direction of the Magistrate calling for a report under Section 156(3) of the Code from the Crime Branch, Pune is not sustainable. He further submitted that the High Court ought to have intervened and quashed the same. According to him, the  complaint and the allegations made therein do not disclose any offence and, therefore, the direction under Section 156(3) of the Code is untenable. He further pointed out that the essential ingredients for an offence under Sections 405 and 420 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (in short `IPC') have not been made out, no such dishonest intention can be seen or even inferred inasmuch as the entire dispute pertains to contractual obligations between the parties. In any event, according to him, in view of long delay, namely, filing of the complaint in the year 2002 with reference to the alleged disputes which pertain to the period from 1993-1995, that is, after nine years, cannot be maintained as it amounts to abuse of process of law. He finally submitted that roping in of appellant Nos. 2-8 in the alleged offence on the hidden principle of vicarious liability is untenable. Mr. C.S. Vaidyanathan, learned senior counsel for the appellant also reiterated the same contentions.

6) On the other hand, Mr. K.T.S. Tulsi, learned senior counsel for the Respondent No. 1/complainant submitted that interference by the court at the stage of passing orders under Section 156 (3) of the Code is not warranted. He further pointed out that the accused has no right to address at this stage and the High Court is right in refusing to entertain the petition filed under Section 482 of the Code.

Discussion:

7) In order to understand the rival contentions, it is useful to refer the complaint of the Respondent No. 1 dated 30.05.2002 which was made before the Judicial Magistrate, First Class, Pimpri in Regular Criminal Case No. 12 of 2002.
Respondent No. 1 herein is the complainant and all the appellants herein have been shown as accused. The said criminal complaint was made for the offences under Sections 420, 406 read with 34 IPC. The complaint proceeds that complainant is the Proprietor of M/s Rini Engineers and M/s Sherly Engineers which are small-scale industries doing fabrication job work for various industries, namely, TELCO, Ion Exchange Ltd., etc. The following averments in the complaint are relevant for our consideration:

"a) The complainant has been doing the said business in Maharashtra since last more than 27 years. The accused No. 1 is a company and accused No. 2 is the Chairperson of the Accused No. 1. Accused No. 3 was the Managing Director  and the Accused Nos. 4 to 15 was doing service as Manager of Accused No. 1 at the relevant time. The Accused No. 1 has its office at the above address. The Accused Nos. 2 to 15 were looking after the management and business of Accused No. 1.
b) The complainant was doing fabrication job work for the Accused for several years. The accused placed purchase order No. 260062 dated 24.04.1995 of Rs. 3,20,000/- for designing and manufacturing two numbers stationary LPG Storage Tanks. The complainant has been granted the necessary licenses by the Explosives Department for manufacturing LPG Storage Tanks and LPG Storage Tankers. The said job is a specialized job and requires Best quality material as it involves high risks. At the relevant time, the required material was not available in the market.
Therefore, the complainant requested the Accused for the supply of material for the said order and to debit the material cost from the final bill. The accused initially agreed for the same. However, subsequently insisted for payment before delivery of material. Therefore, complainant paid Rs.

1,14,098/- by pay order dated 31.07.1995 drawn on the Sadguru Jangli Maharaj Bank, Chinchwad. The Company issued material after receipt of pay order, vide excise gate Pass No. 1328 and 175713 dated 04.08.1995. The complainant received the material and was surprised to see that the accused had supplied scrap material for the manufacturing of LPG Storage Tanks and same was useless for the job. The complainant immediately contacted the accused and informed about the same. The complainant requested the accused to take the scrap material back and issue genuine material. However, accused refused to do so, the complaint has spent the amount of Rs. 60,000/- for drawing and approval etc. and Rs. 1,14,098/- by pay order for the material to the accused. Thus, the accused have cheated the complainant and there by caused wrongful loss to the complainant.

c) The accused placed Purchase Order No. 240307 dated 22.03.1993 for Rs. 8,00,000/- for the fabrication and erection of Tower Support Structural etc. for the Mehasana (Gujarat) Project. The accused also represented that they will hire the machinery of the complainant for the said job at the rate of Rs. 2,400/- per day. Believing the same, the complainant purchased brand new machinery of Rs.

5,80,000/- specially for the said project and dispatched the  same to Mehasana site. The complainant has completed the said job according to schedule and to the satisfaction of the accused. The complainant also carried out additional work at the site as per the request of the accused. The balance outstanding for the said work is Rs. 2,47,570/- and is still receivable from the accused. The amount towards the hiring charges for the machinery is Rs. 58,32,000/- is yet to be paid by the accused. The accused have not returned the machinery of the complainant till the date and have been using the same for their other jobs also. Thus the accused owe the complainant Rs. 68,79,750/- and the same is not paid till the date.

d) The complainant states that he has carried out several fabrication job for the accused and huge amount of Rs.

91,95,054 is outstanding from the accused till the date. In spite of several requests of the complainant, since the accused are very influential, no body has taken cognizance of the complaints of the complainant. The complainant has also filed complaint dated 15.09.1998 with Pimpri Police Station against the accused but all in vain.

e) Thereafter the complainant filed complaint dated 06.05.2000 with Crime Branch, Pune against the accused, however, till the date police have not taken any cognizance of the same in spite of the positive opinion of the police prosecutor attached to the Officer Commissioner of Police, Pune. The accused are very influential and the complainant has no other option but to file the present complaint in Hon'ble Court.

f) The complainant is filing herewith all the relevant documents in support of this complaint and submits that the present case warrants detailed investigation under Section 156(3) of Cr.P.C. There is a separate cell of economic offences at Crime Branch, Pune and it is necessary to send the present complaint to Crime Branch, Pune for investigation under Section 156(3) of Cr.P.C The complainant therefore prays that:-

i)The complaint be sent to Crime Branch, Pune for investigation u/s 156(3) of Cr.P.C. and;
ii) After receipt of the report of investigation, the accused be dealt with severally according to law and punished as per provision of law."
8) For our purpose, we are concerned with Sections 405, 406, 420 and 34 IPC which read thus:
"405. Criminal breach of trust.- Whoever, being in any manner entrusted with property, or with any dominion over property, dishonestly misappropriates or converts to his own use that property, or dishonestly uses or disposes of that property in violation of any direction of law prescribing the mode in which such trust is to be discharged, or of any legal contract, express or implied, which he has made touching the discharge of such trust, or willfully suffers any other person so to do, commits "criminal breach of trust".
406. Punishment for criminal breach of trust.- Whoever commits criminal breach of trust shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.

420. Cheating and dishonestly inducing delivery of property.- Whoever cheats and thereby dishonestly induces the person deceived to deliver any property to any person, or to make, alter or destroy the whole or any part of a valuable security, or anything which is signed or sealed, and which is capable of being converted into a valuable security, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine."

34. Acts done by several persons in furtherance of common intention.- When a criminal act is done by several persons in furtherance of the common intention of all, each of such persons is liable for that act in the same manner as if it were done by him alone.

9) Now, we have to find out whether the ingredients of Sections 405, 420 read with Section 34 have been made out from the complaint and whether the Magistrate is justified in calling for a report under Section 156(3) of the Code from the  Crime Branch, Pune. Simultaneously, we have to see whether the High Court is justified in confirming the action of the Magistrate and failed to exercise its power and jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Code.

10) Before considering the validity or acceptability of the complaint and the consequential action taken by the Judicial Magistrate under Section 156(3) of the Code, let us advert to various decisions on this aspect. In Suresh vs. Mahadevappa Shivappa Danannava & Anr., (2005) 3 SCC 670, this Court, on the ground of delay/laches in filing the complaint and the dispute relates to civil nature finding absence of ingredients of alleged offence of cheating under Section 420 IPC, set aside the order of the Magistrate and that of the High Court. In that case, the alleged agreement to sell was executed on 25.12.1988. A legal notice was issued to the appellant therein on 11.07.1996 calling upon him to execute the sale deed in respect of the premises in question. Thus, the complaint was submitted after a gap of 7= years of splendid silence from the date of the alleged agreement to sell i.e. 25.12.1988. The appellant therein responded to the legal  notice dated 11.07.1996 by his reply dated 18.07.1996 through his lawyer specifically denying the alleged agreement and the payment of Rs 1,25,000/- as advance. Nothing was heard thereafter and the complainant after keeping quiet for nearly 3 years filed private complaint under Section 200 of the Code before the IVth Additional CMM, Bangalore on 17.05.1999. The Magistrate, on the same date, directed his office to register the case as PCR and referred the same to the local police for investigation and to submit a report as per Section 156(3) of the Code. A charge-sheet was filed on 04.08.2000 by the police against the appellant-Accused No. 1 only for offence under Section 420 IPC. The Magistrate took cognizance of the alleged offence under Section 190(1)(b) of the Code and issued summons to the accused-appellant therein.

Aggrieved by the aforesaid process order dated 04.08.2000 passed by the Magistrate, the appellant-accused preferred the criminal revision which was dismissed by the High Court. The order of the High Court was under challenge in that appeal. It was contended that as per the averments in the complaint, even as per the police report, no offence is made out against  Accused Nos. 2-4 therein. Despite this, the Magistrate issued process against Accused Nos. 2-4 as well which clearly shows the non-application of mind by the Magistrate. It was further pointed out that a perusal of the complaint would only reveal that the allegations as contained in the complaint are of civil nature and do not prima facie disclose commission of alleged criminal offence under Section 420 IPC. After finding that inasmuch as the police has given a clean chit to Accused Nos.

2-4, this Court concluded that the Magistrate ought not to have taken cognizance of the alleged offence against Accused No.1 and that the complaint has been made to harass him to come to terms by resorting to criminal process. Regarding the delay, this Court pointed out that the complaint was filed on 17.05.1999, after a lapse of 10= years and, therefore, the private complaint filed by respondent No.1 therein is not at all maintainable at this distance of time. It was further observed that it is also not clearly proved that to hold a person guilty of cheating, it is necessary to show that he had a fraudulent or dishonest intention at the time of making the promise and finding that the order of the Magistrate and of the High Court  requiring Accused No.1/appellant therein to face trial would not be in the interest of justice, set aside the order of the High Court and of the Magistrate. It is clear that in view of inordinate delay and laches on the part of the complainant and of the fact that the complaint does not disclose any ingredients of Section 420 IPC and also of the fact that at the most it is the dispute of civil nature, this Court quashed the orders of the Magistrate and the High Court.

11) In Madhavrao Jiwajirao Scindia & Ors. vs. Sambhajirao Chandrojirao Angre & Ors. (1988) 1 SCC 692, this Court, after pointing out the grounds on which the criminal proceedings be quashed under Section 482 of the Code at preliminary stage by the High Court highlighted that a case of breach of trust is both a civil wrong and a criminal offence. While elaborating the same, this Court further held that there would be certain situations where it would predominantly be a civil wrong and may or may not amount to criminal offence. Based on the materials in that case, the Court concluded that the case is one of that type where, if at  all, the facts may constitute a civil wrong and the ingredients of the criminal offences are wanting.

12) In Alpic Finance Ltd. vs. P. Sadasivan & Anr. (2001) 3 SCC 513, this Court highlighted the grounds on which criminal proceedings are to be quashed under Section 482 of the Code and noted the ingredients of Section 420 IPC. In that case, the appellant was a registered company having its head office at Mumbai. It was a non-banking financial institution functioning under the regulations of Reserve Bank of India. It was carrying on business, inter alia, of leasing and hire purchase. The first respondent therein was the Chairman and founder-trustee of a trust by name "Visveswaraya Education Trust". The second respondent was wife of the first respondent, and was also a Trustee. The Trust runs a dental college by name Rajiv Gandhi Dental College. The respondents therein entered into an agreement with the appellant-Company therein whereby the appellant agreed to finance the purchase of 100 hydraulically-operated dental chairs. The total cost of the chairs was around Rs.92,50,000/-. The appellant-Company agreed to finance the  respondents for the purchase of these chairs through a lease agreement and as per the agreement, the respondents were liable to pay rentals quarterly. The respondents agreed to pay quarterly a sum of Rs 7,50,000/- for the first year; Rs 12,50,000/- for the second year; Rs 8,00,000/- for the third year and Rs 6,25,000/- for the fourth year. As per the agreement, the appellant-Company, the lessors would have sole and exclusive right, title and interest in the dental chairs supplied till the entire hire-purchase amount was paid. In accordance with the agreement, the appellant made payments to M/s United Medico Dental Equipments and they delivered the dental chairs to the respondents. The appellant-Company alleged that the respondents were not regular in making the payments and committed default in payment of the instalments and that the bank had dishonoured certain cheques issued by the respondents. The appellant-Company also alleged that on physical verification, certain chairs were found missing from the premises of the respondents and thus they have committed cheating and caused misappropriation of the property belonging to the appellant. The appellant-

Company filed a private complaint under Section 200 of the Code before the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Bangalore alleging that the respondents had committed offences under Sections 420, 406 and 423 read with Section 120-B IPC. In that proceeding, the appellant-Company moved an application under Section 93 of the Code to issue a search warrant to seize the property in dispute and also to hand over these items to the complainant. The Magistrate took cognizance of the alleged complaint and issued summons to the respondents and passed an order on the application filed under Section 93 of the Code to have a search at the premises of the respondents and to take possession of the properties involved in the case. These proceedings were challenged by the respondents under Section 482 of the Code before the learned Single Judge of the Karnataka High Court at Bangalore. The learned Single Judge was pleased to quash the entire proceedings and directed the appellant-Company to return all the properties seized by the police pursuant to the warrant issued by the Magistrate. Thus, the order of the Magistrate taking cognizance and issuing process to the respondents as  well as the order of search and the direction for restoration of the property to the appellant Company were set aside.

Aggrieved by the same, the appellant-Company preferred appeal before this Court. It was contended on behalf of the appellant that the learned Single Judge has seriously erred in quashing the proceedings under Section 482 of the Code. It was further contended that the allegations in the complaint clearly made out offences punishable under Sections 420, 406, 423, 424 read with Section 120-B IPC. On behalf of the respondents, it was contended that the complaint was filed only to harass the respondents and it was motivated by mala fide intention. It was further argued that the entire transaction was of civil nature and that the respondents have made a substantial payment as per the hire-purchase agreement and the default, if any, was not wilful and there was no element of misappropriation or cheating. The respondents also denied having removed any of the items of the disputed property clandestinely to defeat the interest of the appellant. After considering the power under Section 482 of the Code and adverting to series of decisions including Nagawwa vs. Veeranna Shivalingappa Konjalgi , (1976) 3 SCC 736 and State of Haryana vs. Bhajan Lal, 1992 Supp (1) SCC 335, this Court concluded thus:

"7. In a few cases, the question arose whether a criminal prosecution could be permitted when the dispute between the parties is of predominantly civil nature and the appropriate remedy would be a civil suit. In one case reported in Madhavrao Jiwajirao Scindia v. Sambhajirao Chandrojirao Angre this Court held that if the allegations in the complaint are both of a civil wrong and a criminal offence, there would be certain situations where it would predominantly be a civil wrong and may or may not amount to a criminal offence. That was a case relating to a trust. There were three trustees including the settlor. A large house constituted part of the trust property. The respondent and the complainant were acting as Secretary and Manager of the Trust and the house owned by the Trust was in the possession of a tenant. The tenant vacated the building and the allegation in the complaint was that two officers of the Trust, in conspiracy with one of the trustees and his wife, created documents showing tenancy in respect of that house in favour of the wife of the trustee. Another trustee filed a criminal complaint alleging that there was commission of the offence under Sections 406, 467 read with Sections 34 and 120-B of the Indian Penal Code. The accused persons challenged the proceedings before the High Court under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure and the High Court quashed the proceedings in respect of two of the accused persons. It was under those circumstances that this Court observed: (SCC Headnote) "Though a case of breach of trust may be both a civil wrong and a criminal offence but there would be certain situations where it would predominantly be a civil wrong and may or may not amount to a criminal offence. The present case is one of that type where, if at all, the facts may constitute a civil wrong and the ingredients of the criminal offences are wanting. Having regard to the relevant documents including the trust deed as also the correspondence following the creation of the tenancy, the submissions advanced on behalf of the parties, the natural  relationship between the settlor and the trustee as mother and son and the fall out in their relationship and the fact that the wife of the co- trustee was no more interested in the tenancy, it must be held that the criminal case should not be continued."
10........ The injury alleged may form the basis of civil claim and may also constitute the ingredients of some crime punishable under criminal law. When there is dispute between the parties arising out of a transaction involving passing of valuable properties between them, the aggrieved person may have a right to sue for damages or compensation and at the same time, law permits the victim to proceed against the wrongdoer for having committed an offence of criminal breach of trust or cheating. Here the main offence alleged by the appellant is that the respondents committed the offence under Section 420 IPC and the case of the appellant is that the respondents have cheated him and thereby dishonestly induced him to deliver property. To deceive is to induce a man to believe that a thing is true which is false and which the person practising the deceit knows or believes to be false. It must also be shown that there existed a fraudulent and dishonest intention at the time of commission of the offence. There is no allegation that the respondents made any wilful misrepresentation. Even according to the appellant, the parties entered into a valid lease agreement and the grievance of the appellant is that the respondents failed to discharge their contractual obligations. In the complaint, there is no allegation that there was fraud or dishonest inducement on the part of the respondents and thereby the respondents parted with the property. It is trite law and common sense that an honest man entering into a contract is deemed to represent that he has the present intention of carrying it out but if, having accepted the pecuniary advantage involved in the transaction, he fails to pay his debt, he does not necessarily evade the debt by deception."

After finding so, this Court concluded that the learned Judge of the High Court was perfectly justified in quashing the  proceedings and disinclined to interfere in such matters dismissed the appeal.

13) In Anil Mahajan vs. Bhor Industries Ltd. & Anr. , (2005) 10 SCC 228, again, a three-Judge Bench of this Court considered the issuance of process by a Magistrate for an offence under Sections 415, 418 and 420 IPC. This Court also analysed the difference between breach of contract and cheating. The appellant therein was the accused in a complaint filed against him by the respondent-Company for offence under Sections 415, 418 and 420 IPC. Based on the averments in the complaint, the Magistrate, by order dated 25.06.2001, issued the process against the accused. The order of the Magistrate notices that the complainant has filed the documents on record in which the accused promised to pay the amount but has not paid with the intent to deceive the complainant and, therefore, the complainant has made out a case to issue process against the accused under Sections 415, 418 and 420 IPC. The said order of the Magistrate was challenged before the Court of Sessions. The learned Additional Sessions Judge, Pune by order dated 19.10.2001,  set aside the order of the Magistrate issuing process. The order of the learned Additional Sessions Judge was set aside by the High Court. This Court, in paragraphs 8 & 9 of the judgment, observed as under:

"8. The substance of the complaint is to be seen. Mere use of the expression "cheating" in the complaint is of no consequence. Except mention of the words "deceive" and "cheat" in the complaint filed before the Magistrate and "cheating" in the complaint filed before the police, there is no averment about the deceit, cheating or fraudulent intention of the accused at the time of entering into MOU wherefrom it can be inferred that the accused had the intention to deceive the complainant to pay......................"
"9. In Alpic Finance Ltd. v. P. Sadasivan, (2001) 3 SCC 513, this Court was considering a case where the complainant had alleged that the accused was not regular in making payment and committed default in payment of instalments and the bank had dishonoured certain cheques issued by him. Further allegation of the complainant was that on physical verification certain chairs were found missing from the premises of the accused and thus it was alleged that the accused committed cheating and caused misappropriation of the property belonging to the complainant. Noticing the decision in the case of Nagawwa v. Veeranna Shivalingappa Konjalgi, (1976) 3 SCC 736, wherein it was held that the Magistrate while issuing process should satisfy himself as to whether the allegations in the complaint, if proved, would ultimately end in the conviction of the accused, and the circumstances under which the process issued by the Magistrate could be quashed, the contours of the powers of the High Court under Section 482 CrPC were laid down and it was held: (SCC p. 520, paras 10-11) "10. The facts in the present case have to be appreciated in the light of the various decisions of this Court. When somebody suffers injury to his person, property or reputation, he may have remedies both under civil and criminal law. The injury alleged may form the basis of civil claim  and may also constitute the ingredients of some crime punishable under criminal law. When there is dispute between the parties arising out of a transaction involving passing of valuable properties between them, the aggrieved person may have a right to sue for damages or compensation and at the same time, law permits the victim to proceed against the wrongdoer for having committed an offence of criminal breach of trust or cheating. Here the main offence alleged by the appellant is that the respondents committed the offence under Section 420 IPC and the case of the appellant is that the respondents have cheated him and thereby dishonestly induced him to deliver property. To deceive is to induce a man to believe that a thing is true which is false and which the person practising the deceit knows or believes to be false. It must also be shown that there existed a fraudulent and dishonest intention at the time of commission of the offence. There is no allegation that the respondents made any wilful misrepresentation. Even according to the appellant, the parties entered into a valid lease agreement and the grievance of the appellant is that the respondents failed to discharge their contractual obligations. In the complaint, there is no allegation that there was fraud or dishonest inducement on the part of the respondents and thereby the respondents parted with the property. It is trite law and common sense that an honest man entering into a contract is deemed to represent that he has the present intention of carrying it out but if, having accepted the pecuniary advantage involved in the transaction, he fails to pay his debt, he does not necessarily evade the debt by deception.
11. Moreover, the appellant has no case that the respondents obtained the article by any fraudulent inducement or by wilful misrepresentation. We are told that the respondents, though committed default in paying some instalments, have paid substantial amount towards the consideration."
(Emphasis supplied)  By applying the above principles, this Court examined the complaint and concluded that it is clear from its substance that present is a simple case of civil disputes between the parties. This Court further held that the requisite averments so as to make out a case of cheating are absolutely absent. It further held that the principles laid down in Alpic Finance Ltd.'s case (supra) were rightly applied by the learned Additional Sessions Judge and it cannot be said that the ratio of the said decision was wrongly applied and on due consideration, the learned Additional Sessions Judge had rightly set aside the order of the Magistrate issuing process to the appellant. After holding so, this Court set aside the impugned judgment of the High Court and restored that of the Additional Sessions Judge.

14) In S.K. Alagh vs. State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors., (2008) 5 SCC 662, this Court considered the ingredients of Sections 405 and 406 IPC - Criminal breach of trust and vicarious liability. In the said decision, after finding that the complaint petition did not disclose necessary ingredients of criminal breach of trust as mentioned in Section 405 IPC and  also pointing out the ingredients of offence under Section 406 IPC, interfered with the order passed by the High Court.

15) In Maharashtra State Electricity Distribution Company Limited & Anr. vs. Datar Switchgear Limited & Ors., (2010) 10 SCC 479, after perusal of the complaint, allegations therein, role of the directors mentioned therein and applicability of Section 34 IPC, this Court in paragraph 35 concluded as under:

"35. It is manifest that common intention refers to a prior concert or meeting of minds, and though it is not necessary that the existence of a distinct previous plan must be proved, as such common intention may develop on the spur of the moment, yet the meeting of minds must be prior to the commission of offence suggesting the existence of a prearranged plan. Therefore, in order to attract Section 34 IPC, the complaint must, prima facie, reflect a common prior concert or planning amongst all the accused."
After saying so, verifying the complaint, this Court concluded that the complaint does not indicate the existence of any prearranged plan whereby Appellant No. 2 had, in collusion with the other accused decided to fabricate the document in question and adduce it in evidence before the Arbitral Tribunal. This Court further concluded that there is not even a whisper in the complaint indicating any participation of  Appellant No.2 in the acts constituting the offence, and that being the case, concluded that Section 34 IPC is not attracted.

After saying so, allowed the appeal in relation to Appellant No.2 and quashed the order of the Magistrate taking cognizance against appellant No.2 in Complaint No. 476 of 2004.

16) The principles enunciated from the above-quoted decisions clearly show that for proceedings under Section 156(3) of the Code, the complaint must disclose relevant material ingredients of Sections 405, 406, 420 read with Section 34 IPC. If there is a flavour of civil nature, the same cannot be agitated in the form of criminal proceeding. If there is huge delay and in order to avoid the period of limitation, it cannot be resorted to a criminal proceeding.

17) Dr. A.M. Singhvi, learned senior counsel for the appellant/accused contended that not only material facts were suppressed from the Magistrate but the previous three complaints to various police authorities and their closure reports were kept away from the Magistrate so as to mislead the Court. It is seen from the materials placed that three  complaints containing similar allegations have been investigated previously and all were closed as the alleged claim was found to be of civil nature. In those circumstances, it did not lie for Respondent No.1-the complainant to approach the Magistrate with the same subject Complaint. Inasmuch as the dispute arose out of a contract and a constituted remedy is only before a Civil Court, the Magistrate ought to have appreciated that Respondent No.1 was attempting to use the machinery of the criminal courts for private gains and for exerting unjust, undue and unwarranted pressure on the appellants in order to fulfill his illegal demands and extract undeserving monetary gains from them.

18) The Courts below failed to appreciate that Ex. 61 is a reply filed by the Crime Branch-II and Ex. 63 is the statement of Shri V.B. Kadam, which categorically stated that the complaint preferred by Respondent No.1 registered at Crime Register No. 11/2000 was filed as being civil in nature. Even if we accept that the records were destroyed and notwithstanding such destruction, it was a matter of record that the complaint preferred by Respondent No.1 was indeed  investigated and categorized as civil in nature. This aspect has not been considered either by the Magistrate or by the High Court.

19) It is settled law that the essential ingredients for an offence under Section 420, which we have already extracted, is that there has to be dishonest intention to deceive another person. We have already quoted the relevant allegations in the complaint and perusal of the same clearly shows that no such dishonest intention can be seen or even inferred inasmuch as the entire dispute pertains to contractual obligations between the parties. Since the very ingredients of Section 420 are not attracted, the prosecution initiated is wholly untenable. Even if we admit that allegations in the complaint do make out a dispute, still it ought to be considered that the same is merely a breach of contract and the same cannot give rise to criminal prosecution for cheating unless fraudulent or dishonest intention is shown right from the beginning of the transaction.

Inasmuch as there are number of documents to show that appellant-Company had acted in terms of the agreement and  in a bona fide manner, it cannot be said that the act of the appellant-Company amounts to a breach of contract.

20) Though Respondent No.1 has roped all the appellants in a criminal case without their specific role or participation in the alleged offence with the sole purpose of settling his dispute with appellant-Company by initiating the criminal prosecution, it is pointed out that appellant Nos. 2 to 8 are the Ex-Chairperson, Ex-Directors and Senior Managerial Personnel of appellant No.1-Company, who do not have any personal role in the allegations and claims of Respondent No.1. There is also no specific allegation with regard to their role.

21) Apart from the fact that the complaint lacks necessary ingredients of Sections 405, 406, 420 read with Section 34 IPC, it is to be noted that the concept of `vicarious liability' is unknown to criminal law. As observed earlier, there is no specific allegation made against any person but the members of the Board and senior executives are joined as the persons looking after the management and business of the appellant-

Company.

22) It is useful to demonstrate certain examples, namely, Section 141 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 which specifically provides that if the person committing an offence under Section 138 is a company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. Likewise, Section 32 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 provides that where a person committing an offence under this Act is a company, or other body corporate, or an association of persons, every director, manager, secretary, agent or other officer or person concerned with the management thereof shall, unless he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or consent, be deemed to be guilty of such offence. We have already noted that the offence alleged in the criminal complaint filed by respondent No.1 is under Sections 405 and 420 IPC whereunder no specific liability is imposed on the officers of the company, if the alleged offence is by the Company. In the  absence of specific details about the same, no person other than appellant No.1-Company can be prosecuted under the alleged complaint.

23) The Courts below failed to appreciate an important aspect that the complaint came to be filed in the year 2002 when the alleged disputes pertain to the period from 1993- 1995. As rightly pointed out, the Courts below ought to have appreciated that respondent No.1 was trying to circumvent the jurisdiction of the Civil Courts which estopped him from proceeding on account of the law of limitation.

24) We have already pointed out that respondent No.1 had previously filed three complaints which were concluded after exhaustive enquiry with the respective police authorities. The first complaint was on 06.05.2000 being Javak No. 974/2000 with the Crime Branch-II, Pune which registered the same in its Criminal Register No. 11/2000. Pursuant thereto, the appellants were summoned and exhaustive enquiry was conducted by the Crime Branch-II and after recording the statements and perusal of documents and after undertaking an extensive interrogation, the Crime Branch-II closed the  case. The said closure of the case was informed to respondent No.1 by the police authorities by their letter dated 28.07.2000.

25) The materials placed further show that notwithstanding the complaint dated 06.05.2000 which was closed by the Crime Branch-II, another complaint on the same facts, was filed by respondent No.1 at the Bhosari Police Station being Javak No. 3142/2001. It is pointed out that the appellant and its officers attended the Bhosari Police Station, thereafter the said complaint was also closed after the facts were placed before the officers of the Bhosari Police Station.

26) Apart from these complaints, respondent No.1 once again filed a third complaint at the Commissioner's Office, Crime Branch, Pune being Javak No. 100/2001. The officers of appellant-Company appeared before the Crime Branch, who after perusing the documents and the written statements of appellant No.1, informed the appellants that the matter was closed.

27) It is the grievance of the appellants that without disclosing these material facts and suppressing the fact that the complainant had previously filed three different complaints to various police authorities and that the said complaints were closed on being classified as civil disputes, the complainant had filed the aforesaid criminal complaint before the Magistrate being RCC No. 12 of 2002.

28) Mr. K.T.S. Tulsi, learned senior counsel for respondent No.1 has pointed out that at this stage, namely, issuance of direction to the police for submission of report under Section 156(3) of the Code, the accused has no role and need not be heard. The said contention is undoubtedly in consonance with the procedure prescribed. However, in view of specific direction of the Division Bench of the High Court by a common order dated 10.06.2003, disposing off the cases by remitting the matter back to the Magistrate for reconsideration of the entire prayer as made by the complainant and to pass fresh orders, after giving adequate opportunity of hearing to both the sides, and decide afresh the application seeking direction under Section 156(3) by giving cogent reasons for coming to  such conclusion, the procedure adopted by the Magistrate cannot be faulted with. Though the appellant Company/accused has no right to be heard at this stage in view of the direction of the High Court, no exception be taken to the order of the Magistrate hearing the Complainant and the appellant Company/accused even at the stage of calling for a report under Section 156(3) of the Code.

29) The entire analysis of the complaints with reference to the principles enunciated above and the ingredients of Sections 405, 406, 420 read with Section 34 IPC clearly show that there was inordinate delay and laches, the complaint itself is inherently improbable contains the flavour of civil nature and taking note of the closure of earlier three complaints that too after thorough investigation by the police, we are of the view that the Magistrate committed a grave error in calling for a report under Section 156(3) of the Code from the Crime Branch, Pune. In view of those infirmities and in the light of Section 482 of the Code, the High Court ought to have quashed those proceedings to safeguard the rights of the appellants. For these reasons, the order passed by the  Judicial Magistrate First Class, Pimpri in CC No. 12 of 2002 on 20.08.2007 and the judgment of the High Court dated 11.01.2008 in Criminal Writ Petition No. 1622 of 2007 are set aside. The complaint filed by Respondent No.1 herein is quashed.

30) For the reasons stated above, the appeal is allowed.

...................

..............................J. (P. SATHASIVAM) ..................................................J. (DR. B.S. CHAUHAN) NEW DELHI;

SEPTEMBER 27, 2011.
================================================================================


================================================================================
CASE 3:
[Cites 31, Cited by 375]
Supreme Court of India
Ram Lal Narang Etc. Etc vs State Of Delhi (Admn.) on 10 January, 1979
Equivalent citations: 1979 AIR 1791, 1979 SCC (2) 322, AIR 1979 SUPREME COURT 1791
Author: O. Chinnappa Reddy
Bench: O. Chinnappa Reddy, N.L. Untwalia
           PETITIONER:
RAM LAL NARANG ETC. ETC.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF DELHI (ADMN.)

DATE OF JUDGMENT10/01/1979

BENCH:
REDDY, O. CHINNAPPA (J)
BENCH:
REDDY, O. CHINNAPPA (J)
UNTWALIA, N.L.

CITATION:
 1979 AIR 1791		  1979 SCC  (2) 322


ACT:
     Criminal Procedure	 Code, 1973, Section 173-Whether the
Police	have   powers  to  further  investigate,  after	 the
magistrate has	taken cognizance  of the  offence-Scope	 and
ambit of Section 173 Cr. P.C.



HEADNOTE:
     A criminal	 case, arising	out of	F.I.R.	72  of	1967
against one  Sri Bali  Ram Sharma  and two  others  for	 the
offence of  the theft  of two  sandstone  pillars  of  great
antiquity, beauty  and value  from the Suraj Kund Temple, in
village Amin,  Dist. Karnal,  ended in	the acquittal of the
accused. During the pendency of this case, on an application
made by him one Narinder Nath Malik (N. N. Malik) an alleged
research scholar and a friend of H. L. Mehta, the then Chief
Judicial Magistrate  was given	the  custody  of  these	 two
sandstone pillars which had been recovered from the accused.
The pillars remained in the custody of N. N. Malik from 1-3-
1968 to 27-5-1968 and on the acquittal of the accused on 16-
7-1968, they  were handed  over to  the Lambardar of Village
Amin. Later,  it came  to light that the pillars returned by
Malik were  not the  original pillars  but fakes. Thereupon,
F.I.R. RC  2-71-CIA/SPE/CBI was	 registered at Delhi against
Malik and H. L. Mehta under Section 120 B read with Sections
406 and	 420 I.P.C.  After completing  the  investigation  a
charge sheet  No. RC  2 of  1971 was filed on 30-12-1972, in
the Court of Special Magistrate, Ambala against Malik and H.
L. Mehra  for the  aforesaid offences  noted in	 the  F.I.R.
Though an  order  was  passed  on  17-5-1976  directing	 the
framing	 of   charges,	no  charges  were  actually  framed.
However, on  16-5-77, on  an application dated 17-4-77 filed
by the	Public Prosecutor  under Section 494 of the Criminal
Procedure Code,	 1973, the  Special Magistrate permitted the
withdrawal of  the case	 and discharged	 the accused. During
the pendency  of the  case, the	 two  genuine  pillars	were
traced and  found in London in the ware house of Spink & Co.
It was	suspected that	Manohar Lal Narang and Ramlal Narang
had engaged  Balkishan Rawal  and Nathubai Rawal of Delhi to
make three  sets of  fakes  and	 had  exported	the  genuine
pillars to  London. This  resulted  in	the  registering  of
F.I.R. RC  4/76-CIU(A)/SPE by  the Superintendent of Police,
CIV (Antiquities  SPE/CBI, New	Delhi) against	Manohar	 Lal
Narang and  others for	alleged offences under Section 120B,
read with  Section 411	I.P.C. and  Section 25	(1)  of	 the
Antiquities and	 Art Treasures	Act,  1972.  An	 application
under s.  306 Cr.P.C.  filed by	 N. N.	Malik  on  26-6-1976
before the  Chief Metropolitan	Magistrate, New	 Delhi	with
reference to  this F.I.R.  RC 4/76, was accepted on 3-7-1976
and Malik  was granted	pardon, after confessional statement
was recorded. On 19-7-1976 a charge sheet was filed (RC 4 of
1976) before  the same	Court for  offences  under  Sections
120B, I.P.C.  read with	 Section 420, 411 and 406 I.P.C. and
Section 25  of the  Antiquities and  Art Treasures Act 1972.
The case  was transferred  to the  Court of Additional Chief
Metropolitan Magistrate.  On 20-7-1976 the Magistrate issued
process for  the appearance  of the  accused  including	 the
three Narang  brothers out  of whom  the appellant  in	Crl.
Appeal 373  of 1978  was already  under detention under MISA
and  COFEPOSA.	The  other  two	 who  were  in	London	were
extradited and brought
924
to India on 27-7-1977. An application filed by Ramlal Narang
in March  1977 immediately after his release from detention,
to  drop   the	proceedings   against  him,  to	 cancel	 the
extradition  warrants	against	 his  two  brothers  and  to
discharge all the accused on the ground of illegality of the
Delhi case in view of the fact that a case on the same facts
was already  pending in	 the Ambala Court failed. Thereafter
two applications filed by the three Narang brothers on 21-6-
1977 in	 the Delhi  High Court	under Section  482 Crl. P.C.
once again  challenging	 the  legality	of  the	 proceedings
arising out of charge sheet RC4 of 1974 were admitted on 22-
6-1977, but  dismissed on  10-1-1978. During the pendency of
these two  appeals Malik  died sometime	 during May 1977 and
Mehra was made a co-accused in the Delhi case on 1-8-1977 in
view of the withdrawal of the Ambala case on 16-5-1977.
     Dismissing the appeals by special leave, the Court,
^
     HELD: 1.  The police  have the statutory right and duty
to 'register'  every information  relating to the commission
of a  cognizable offence. The police also have the statutory
right and  duty to investigate the facts and circmstances of
the case  where the  commission of  a cognizable offence was
suspected and  to submit the report of such investigation to
the Magistrate having jurisdiction to take cognizance of the
offence upon  a police	report. These  statutory rights	 and
duties of  the police were not circumscribed by any power of
superintendence or  interference in  the Magistrate; nor was
any sanction  required from  a	Magistrate  to	empower	 the
police to investigate into a cognizable offence. [937 F-H]
     (a) The  scheme of	 the 1898 Code of Criminal Procedure
was that  the  First  Information  Report  was	followed  by
investigation, the  investigation led to the submission of a
report to  the Magistrate, the Magistrate took cognizance of
the offence on receipt of the police report and finally, the
Magistrate taking  cognizance issued process to the accused.
As such	 ordinarily the	 right and  duty of the police would
end with  the submission  of a	report under  Section 173(1)
Criminal Procedure  Code upon  receipt of which it was up to
the Magistrate	to take	 or not	 to take  cognizance of	 the
offence. [937 E-F, 938 F]
     (b) There was no provision in the 1898 Code prescribing
the procedure  to be followed by the police, where after the
submission  of	 a  report  under  Section  173(1)  Criminal
Procedure Code and after the Magistrate had taken cognizance
of the	offence, fresh	facts came  to light  which required
further	 investigation.	 Similarly,  there  was	 no  express
provision prohibiting  the police  from	 launching  upon  an
investigation into the fresh facts coming to light after the
submission of  the report  under Section 173(1) or after the
Magistrate had	taken cognizance  of the  offence. Therefore
further investigation was permissible and was not altogether
ruled out  merely because  cognizance of  the case  has been
taken by  the Court; defective investigation coming to light
during the  course of  a trial	could also  be	cured  by  a
further investigation,	if circumstances  permitted it. [938
F-H, 941 C-D]
	  King Emperor	v. Khwaja  Wazir  Ahmed,  71  Indian
     Appeals, PC 203: followed.
	  Diwakar Singh	 v. A.	Ramamurthy Naidu,  AIR	1919
     Madras 751. In re. Palaniswami Goundan, AIR 1946 Madras
     502; Mohd. Niwaj v. The Crown, 48 Crl. L.J. 744 Lahore;
     Prosecuting Inspector v. Minaketan
925
     Monato, AIR  1952 Orissa  350; Ramashankar	 v. State of
     U.P., AIR	1956 All.  525; In  re. State  of Kerala  v.
     State Prosecutor,	79 Crl.	 L.J. 1973  p. 1288 (Kerala)
     D.B.; approved.
	  H. N.	 Rishbud v.  State of  Delhi, [1955]  1	 SCR
     1150; Tara Singh v. State [1951] SCR 72; referred to.
     2. (a)  Neither Section 173 nor section 190 lead to the
conclusion  that   the	power	of  the	 police	 to  further
investigate  was   exhausted  by   the	 Magistrate   taking
cognizance  of	 the  offence.	 Practice,  convenience	 and
preponderance	 of	authority,    permitted	    repeated
investigations and discovery of fresh facts. Notwithstanding
that a Magistrate had taken cognizance of the offence upon a
police report  submitted under Section 173 of the 1898 Code,
the right  of the  police to  further  investigate  was	 not
exhausted and  the police could exercise such right as often
as necessary when fresh information came to light. Where the
police desired	to make	 a further investigation, the police
could express  their regard  and respect  for the  Court  by
seeking its formal permission to make further investigation.
[943 G-H, 944 A]
     (b) When  it comes	 to the	 notice of the investigating
agency that  a person already an accused of an offence has a
good alibi  or where  the involvement of persons who are not
already accused	 comes to  the notice  of the  investigating
agency, the  investigating  agency  cannot  keep  quiet	 and
refuse to  investigate the  fresh information.	It is  their
duty to	 investigate and  submit a  report to the Magistrate
upon the  innocence or involvement of the persons concerned.
In either  case, it is for the Magistrate to decide upon his
future course  of action  depending upon  the stage at which
the case  is before  him. If he has already taken cognizance
of the	offence, but  has not  proceeded with the enquiry or
trial, he may direct the issue of process to persons freshly
discovered to be involved and deal with all the accused in a
single enquiry	or trial.  If  the  case  of  which  he	 has
previously taken  cognizance has  already proceeded  to some
extent,	 he   may  take	 fresh	cognizance  of	the  offence
disclosed against  the newly  involved accused	and  proceed
with the  case as  a separate case. What action a Magistrate
is to  take in accordance with the provisions of the Code of
Criminal Procedure  in such situations is a matter best left
to the discretion of the Magistrate. A further investigation
by the	police cannot  be considered  as trenching  upon the
proceedings before the Court because whatever the police may
do, the final discretion in regard to further action is with
the Magistrate.	 That the  final word is with the Magistrate
is sufficient  safeguard against  any excessive use or abuse
of the	power of  the police  to make further investigation.
[942 F-H, 943 A-D]
     Ram Gopal Neotia v. State of West Bengal, AIR 1969 Cal.
316 Hanuman  and Anr.  v. Raj. AIR 1951 Rajasthan 131; State
v. Mehr Singh and Ors., ILR 1973 (3) P & H 561-[1974] 2 Cal.
LJ 970; over-ruled.
     (c) Where	the report  of the  second investigation  is
submitted to  a Magistrate other than the Magistrate who has
already taken  cognizance of the first case, it is up to the
prosecuting  agency   or  the	accused	 concerned  to	take
necessary action by moving the appropriate superior Court to
have the two cases tried together. The Magistrate themselves
may take action suo motu. [944 B]
926
     In the  instant case;  the prosecution did not act with
any oblique  motive or	out of	any malice  by submitting  a
charge sheet  to the Delhi Court and by withdrawing the case
in the	Ambala Court. In the charge sheet filed in the Delhi
Court, it was expressly mentioned that a case had been filed
in the	Delhi Court against Mehra and others and, therefore,
it was not necessary to prosecute Mehra in the Ambala Court.
The Court  granted its	permission for the withdrawal of the
case. [944 C-E]
     3. Where  the conspiracy  discovered later	 is found to
cover a	 much larger  canvas with  broader ramifications, it
cannot be  equated with the earlier conspiracy which covered
a smaller field of narrower dimentions. [936 B-C]
     In the present case, (a) the conspiracies which are the
subject matter	of the	two  cases  cannot  be	said  to  be
identical though  the conspiracy which is the subject matter
of the first case, may perhaps be said to have turned out to
be part of the conspiracy which is the subject matter of the
second	case.	When  investigation   commenced	  in   First
Information  Report   No.  RC4	 of  1976,  apart  from	 the
circumstance that  the property	 involved was  the same, the
link between  the conspiracy  to cheat and to misappropriate
and the conspiracy to dispose of the stolen property was not
known. [936 C-D]
     (b) A  comparison of  the two  First Information Report
coupled with  the several  facts and circumstances show that
the conspiracy	which was  the subject	matter of the second
case could  not be  said to be identical with the conspiracy
which  was  the	 subject  matter  of  the  first  case.	 The
conspirators were  different. Malik  and  Mehra	 alone	were
stated to  be the  conspirators in the first case, while the
three Narang  brothers were  alleged  to  be  the  principal
conspirators in	 the second  case. The	objects of  the	 two
conspiracies were different. The alleged object of the first
conspiracy was	to obtain possession of the pillars from the
Court by  cheating and	to misappropriate  them. The alleged
object of  the second  conspiracy was  the disposal  of	 the
stolen property	 by exporting  the pillars  to	London.	 The
offences alleged  in the  first case  were Section 120B read
with Section  420  and	406  Indian  Penal  Code  while	 the
offences alleged  in the  second case were S. 120B read with
S. 411	IPC and	 Section  25  of  the  Antiquities  and	 Art
Treasures Act, 1972. [935 D-F]
     (c) No  fault  could  be  found  with  the	 police	 for
registering a  first information  Report against  the Narang
brothers for  the offence of conspiracy to commit an offence
under section  411 Indian  Penal Code.	In the course of the
investigation into  this offence,  it  transpired  that	 the
Narang brothers were also parties to the original conspiracy
to obtain  possession of  the  pillars	from  the  Court  by
cheating Facts	came  to  light	 which	indicated  that	 the
conspiracy which  was the subject matter of the case pending
in the Ambala Court was but part of a larger conspiracy. The
fresh facts  which came	 to light  resulted in the filing of
the second charge sheet. [935 C-D]
     (d) Neither  at the  time when  the  First	 Information
Report pertaining  to the  Ambala Case was registered nor at
the time  when the  Charge sheet  was filed  in	 the  Ambala
Court, were  the Narang brothers known to be in the picture.
The investigating  agency was  not also	 aware of what Malik
and Mehra  had done with the pillars after they had obtained
possession of the pillars from the Court and substituted and
returned fake  pillars to  the Court.  The First Information
Report and  the charge-sheet  were concerned  primarily with
the
927
offences  of  conspiracy  to  cheat  and  to  misappropriate
committed  by	Malik  and   Mehra.  At	  that	stage,	 the
investigating agency was not aware of any conspiracy to send
the pillars out of the country. It was not known that Narang
brothers were  also parties  to	 the  conspiracy  to  obtain
possession of the pillars from the Court. It was much later,
that the pillars surfaced in London were discovered to be in
the constructive  possession of	 Narang brothers. Even then,
the precise  connection between	 Malik and  Mehra on the one
side and  Narang brothers  on the  other was  not known. All
that was  known was  that  the	pillars	 which	were  stolen
property within	 the definition of the expression in Section
410 Indian  Penal Code were found to be in the possession of
Narang brothers	 in London.  On the discovery of the genuine
pillars	 in  the  possession  of  Narang  brothers,  without
anything further  to connect  Narang brothers with Malik and
Mehra, the police had no option but to register a case under
Section 411  Indian Penal Code against Narang brothers. That
was what was done. [934 F-H, 935 A-B]
Observation:
	  In  the  interests  of  the  independence  of	 the
	  magistracy and  the judiciary, in the interests of
	  the  purity  of  the	administration	of  criminal
	  justice and  in the interests of the comity of the
	  various agencies  and institutions  entrusted with
	  different stages  of such administration, it would
	  ordinarily be	 desirable that	 the  police  should
	  inform the  Court and	 seek formal  permission  to
	  make further	investigation when  fresh facts come
	  to light. [943 E]



JUDGMENT:
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal Nos. 373-374 of 1978.

Appeals by Special Leave from the Judgment and Orders dated 10-1-1978 and 14-9-1978 of the Delhi High Court in Criminal Misc. (M) No. 323 and 322/77 and Criminal Misc. Nos. 1083, 1149 of 1978 in Special Misc. (M) No. 322/77.

Ram Jethmalani (In Crl. A.373), A. K. Sen (In Crl. A.374) and Harjinder Singh for the Appellants.

U. R. Lalit and R. N. Sachthey for the Respondent. The Judgment of the Court was delivered by CHINNAPPA REDDY, J.-On the intervening night of 31st March 1967 and Ist April 1967, two sandstone pillars of great antiquity, beauty and value were stolen from Suraj Kund temple, in Village Amin (District Karnal, Haryana). They were of the Sunga period (2nd Century B.C.) and their present estimated value in the International Art Treasures' Market is said to be around five hundred thousand American dollars. A first information report (F.I.R. No. 72 of 1967) was registered by the Police of Butana, District Karnal. The pillars were recovered on 2nd May 1967. On completion of investigation a charge-sheet was filed on 3rd October 1967 in the Court of the Ilaqa Magistrate at Karnal, against one Bali Ram Sharma and two others. 3-119 SCI/79 The case ended in their acquittal on 16th July 1968. During the pendency of the case one Narinder Nath Malik (N. N. Malik) filed an application before the Magistrate alleging that he was a research scholar and requesting that he might be given custody of the two pillars to enable him to make a detailed study. At the instance of H. L. Mehra, the then Chief Judicial Magistrate, Karnal and a friend of N. N. Malik, the learned Ilaqa Magistrate gave custody of the two pillars to N. N. Malik on his executing a personal bond in a sum of Rs. 20,000/-. The order was written by H. L. Mehra himself and signed by the Ilaqa Magistrate. The pillars remained in the custody of N. N. Malik from Ist March 1968 to 27th May 1968, when N. N. Malik purported to return them to the Court of the Ilaqa Magistrate, Karnal. After the acquittal of Bali Ram Sharma and others, the pillars were handed over to the Lambardar of village Amin. Later, it came to light that the pillars returned by N. N. Malik were not the original pillars but fakes. Thereupon, First Information Report No. RC.2/71-CIA/SPE/CBI was registered at Delhi against N. N. Malik and H. L. Mehra under Section 120-B read with Sections 406 and 420 Indian Penal Code. After completing the investigation the C.B.I. filed a charge-sheet No. R.C. 2 of 1971 in the Court of Special Magistrate, Ambala, against N. N. Malik and H. L. Mehra for alleged offences under Section 120-B read with Sections 406 and 420 Indian Penal Code. The charge-sheet was filed on 30th December, 1972. On 17th May, 1976, the learned Special Magistrate, Ambala, passed an order directing the framing of charges against N. N. Malik and H. L. Mehra. But, no charges were actually framed as the accused were not present in the Court. On 17th April, 1977, the Public Prosecutor filed an application under Section 494 Criminal Procedure Code for permission to withdraw the case against Malik and Mehra. The learned Special Magistrate, Ambala, by his order dated 16th May 1977, permitted the withdrawal of the case and discharged the accused.

Between May 1976 and May 1977 several other things happened and the Narang brothers, the appellants in the two appeals, made their appearance on the scene. It may be mentioned here, that of the three Narang brothers, Om Prakash alias Omi Narang had been living in London since 1970, Manohar Lal alias Manu Narang had been similarly living in London since July 1974 and Ram Lal Narang alone had been living in India. Ram Lal Narang was detained first under the MISA from September 1974 till he was released under orders of the High Court, and later, under the COFEPOSA from 1st July 1975 till after the revocation of the internal Emergency in March 1977.

The two genuine pillars which had been removed from Suraj Kund temple were traced and found in London in the warehouse of Messrs Spink & Co. It was suspected that Manoharlal Narang and Ramlal Narang had engaged Balkishan Rawal and Nathubhai Rawal of Delhi to make three sets of fakes and had exported the genuine pillars to London. A First Information Report (R.C. 4/76-CIU(A)/SPE) was registered by the Superintendent of Police, CIU (Antiquities, SPE/CBI, New Delhi) against Manohar Lal Narang and others, for alleged offences under Section 120-B Indian Penal Code read with Section 411 Indian Penal Code and Section 25(1) of the Antiquities and Art Treasures Act, 1972, On 26th June, 1976, N. N. Malik made and application before the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi, in case R.C. No. 4/76- CIU(A)/SPE, New Delhi, purporting to be under Section 306 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, praying that he might be granted pardon. The application mentioned Sections 411, 406 and 420 Indian Penal Code read with Section 120-B and Section 25(1) of the Antiquities and Art Treasures Act, 1972, as the offences involved. The application was supported by the reply filed by the Superintendent of Police, C.B.I. On 3rd July 1976, the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi, granted pardon to N. N. Malik. Before the grant of pardon the confessional statement of N. N. Malik was got recorded by the Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi. Thereafter, on 19th July 1976, a charge-sheet (R.C. 4/1976) was filed in the Court of Chief Judicial Magistrate, Delhi, for offences under Section 120-B Indian Penal Code read with Sections 420, 411 and 406 Indian Penal Code and Section 25 of the Antiquities and Art Treasures Act, 1972. The case was transferred to the Court of the Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate. On 20th July 1976, the Additional Metropolitan Magistrate issued process for the appearance of the three Narang brothers. The learned Magistrate also issued warrants for the extradition of Omi Narang and Manu Narang who were in London. Extradition proceedings were initiated in Britain at the instance of the Government of India. The Metropolitan Magistrate, Bow Street, London ordered the detention of Omi Narang and Manu Narang pending the issue of warrants by the Secretary of State under Section 5 of the Fugitive Offenders Act. A petition for the issue of Writ of Habeas Corpus Ad Subjiciendum was filed in the High Court of Justice, Queen's Bench Division, London. The Divisional Court directed the release of Omi Narang and Manu Narang. The Government of India filed an appeal to the House of Lords and on 24th March, 1977, the appeal was allowed. Omi Narang and Manu Narang were finally extradited and brought to India on 27th July, 1977.

Meanwhile internal emergency was lifted in India in March 1977 and Ram Lal Narang was released. Almost immediately he filed a petition before the Additional Metropolitan Magistrate to drop the proceedings against him, to cancel the extradition warrants and to discharge the accused. The contention was that the entire investigation in First Information Report No. R.C. 4/76 was illegal as a case on the same facts was already pending before the Ambala Court and that the Delhi Court acted without jurisdiction in taking cognizance of the case pursuant to a report of police based upon such illegal investigation. The learned Magistrate held that he was not competent to sit in judgment, as it were, over the order of his predecessor taking cognizance of the case. He, however, found that the conspiracy which was the subject matter of the case before the Court at Ambala and the conspiracy which was the subject matter of the case before himself were one and the same, but, he held that the question as to which Court should proceed with the case, was not for him to decide; it was a matter for the High Court to decide under Section 186 Criminal Procedure Code. The learned Magistrate also noticed an application filed before him, after the conclusion of arguments, informing him that the case in the Court at Ambala against Malik and Mehra had since been withdrawn on 16th May 1977.

On 21st June 1977, two applications were filed in the Delhi High Court under Section 482 Criminal Procedure Code, one by Ramlal Narang and the other on behalf of Omi Narang and Manu Narang who were still in England awaiting extradition. The applicants sought quashing of the orders of the learned Metropolitan Magistrate issuing process to them and warrants for the extradition of Omi Narang and Manu Narang. It was also sought to be declared that the entire investigation in R.C. 4 of 1976 was illegal and the orders of the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate and the Additional Metropolitan Magistrate taking cognizance of R.C. 4 of 1976 were illegal. The grant of pardon to N. N. Malik was questioned. It was also prayed that the proceedings before the Metropolitan Magistrate might be quashed. The petitions were admitted by the Delhi High Court on 22nd June, 1977, but ultimately dismissed on 10th January 1978, by a common judgment. Ramlal Narang having obtained special leave from this Court has filed Criminal Appeal No. 373 of 1978 and Omi and Manu Narang have preferred Criminal Appeal No. 374 of 1978. We may mention here that on 1st August, 1977, a supplemental charge-sheet was filed making Mehra an accused in the Delhi case, the case in the Ambala Court having been withdrawn on 16th May, 1977, as mentioned earlier. Malik, we may add, died sometime during August, 1977.

We are given to understand that Mehra also was subsequently granted pardon.

Shri Harjinder Singh, learned Counsel for the appellant in Criminal Appeal No. 373 of 1978 and Shri Ashok Sen, learned Counsel for the appellants in Criminal Appeal No. 374 of 1978 argued that the conspiracy and the overt acts which were the subject matter of the two First Information Reports and the two charge-sheets were the same and, therefore, there was an implied bar to the power of the Police to investigate into First Information Report No. R.C. 4 of 1976 and the power of the Court at Delhi to take cognizance of the case upon the report of such information. It was submitted that the mere circumstance that some more persons were mentioned as involved or the mere circumstance that the property was said to have been recovered later would not affect the legal position. It was submitted that gist of the conspiracy in both the cases was to obtain possession of the pillars. The offence of conspiracy relating to the obtaining of the pillars having been investigated and a charge-sheet having been filed in the Ambala Court, the Police had no authority in law to start a fresh investigation under the Criminal Procedure Code by registering another First Information Report and to submit a charge-sheet in the Delhi Court for the very same offence. That was an unwarranted interference by the Police with the proceedings pending in the Court. The whole of the investigation subsequent to the filing of the charge-sheet in the Ambala Court was without jurisdiction and no material or fact gathered during the course of such illegal investigation could be used to found further proceedings. The Delhi Court was, therefore, in error in taking cognizance of offences which had already been investigated and which were the subject matter of proceedings in another Court. It was also argued that the subsequent withdrawal of the case from the Ambala Court did not and could not confer jurisdiction on the Delhi Court. The withdrawal itself was an abuse of the process of the Court.

Shri Lalit, learned Counsel for the respondents urged that the conspiracy which was the subject matter of the charge-sheet filed in the Delhi Court was not the same as the conspiracy which was the subject matter of the charge- sheet filed in the Ambala Court. The circumstance that some of the conspirators were common and part of the case was the same did not make the two conspiracies identical with each other. There was, therefore, no question of any bar against the Delhi Court from taking cognizance of the case based upon the wider conspiracy merely because the Ambala Court had taken cognizance of the case based upon the narrower conspiracy. Shri Lalit also urged that the statutory right of the Police to investigate into cognizable offences was not fettered and did not end with the submission of a charge-sheet to the Court. He submitted that the Police had the right and indeed, the duty, to investigate into fresh facts coming to light and to appraise the Court of the same.

The basic submission on behalf of the appellants was that the two conspiracies alleged in the two cases were but one. The sequitur was that the investigation into and the taking of cognizance of the second case were without jurisdiction.

We will first examine the question whether the conspiracy which was investigated by the Police and which investigation led to the filing of the charge-sheet in the Ambala case can be said to be the same as the conspiracy which was later investigated and which led to the filing of the charge-sheet in the Delhi Court. For this purpose, it is necessary to compare the First Information Report and the charge-sheet in the two cases.

The First Information Report relating to the case in the Ambala Court was registered against "N. N. Malik and others" for alleged offences under "Section 120-B Indian Penal Code read with Section 420 and Section 406 Indian Penal Code." It was stated therein that N. N. Malik applied to the Court of the Judicial Magistrate 1st Class, Karnal and obtained possession of the two stone pillars and dishonestly substituted two fake pillars in their place and returned them to the Court. The charge-sheet which was filed on 30th December, 1972 mentioned N. N. Malik and H. L. Mehra as the two accused in the case and recited that N. N. Malik was introduced by Mehra to the Magistrate as an eminent archaeologist and that he obtained possession of the pillars on the pretext that he wanted to make some research. The actual order granting custody of the pillars to Malik was written by Mehra but signed by the Magistrate R. K. Sen. It was further recited that sometime after the pillars were returned by Malik to the Court it was discovered that the pillars so returned were fakes and that N. N. Malik was not an archaeologist. It was finally said that Malik and Mehra had "thus dishonestly made misrepresentation of fact and got the delivery of the two statues which were subsequently substituted by them" and they had "thus committed the offence under Section 120-B read with Section 420 Indian Penal Code and Section 406 Indian Penal Code." It is, therefore, seen from the allegations in the charge-sheet filed in the Ambala Court that the conspirators involved in the conspiracy which was its subject matter were two, namely, Malik and Mehra, that the object of the conspiracy was to dishonestly obtain possession of the pillars by making false representation to the Magistrate and to substitute the pillars by fakes after obtaining possession of the same and that the offences committed were under Section 120-B read with Section 420 and 406 Indian Penal Code.

The First Information Report in the Delhi case was registered on 13th May, 1976, and the offences mentioned were Section 120-B Indian Penal Code read with Section 411 Indian Penal Code and Section 25(1) of the Antiquities and Art Treasures Act, 1972. The accused mentioned in the report were Manu Narang and Ramlal Narang. After reciting that the pillars had been taken from the Court by N. N. Malik and had been substituted by fake pillars, the First Information Report went on to recite that the genuine pillars, which were stolen from Suraj Kund temple as mentioned above were found to be in the possession and control of Manohar Lal alias Manu Narang in London. It was further recited that Manu Narang was negotiating the sale of the pillars through some London brokers and the price expected to be fetched was approximately five hundred American dollars. It was recited further that Manu Narang and his brother Ramlal Narang had commissioned two well known sculptors of Delhi to make three sets of fake pillars. The two brothers and others, acting in conspiracy, had dishonestly received and exported the two stone pillars. The charge-sheet which followed the investigation was filed on 19th July 1976 in the Delhi Court. The charge-sheet mentioned the three Narang brothers, Ramlal Narang, Manoharlal Narang and Om Parkash Narang, as the three accused persons sent up for trial and H. L. Mehra as a person not sent up for trial as he was already facing trial before the Special Magistrate, Ambala. The charge- sheet recited, among other facts, that the Narang brothers had come to know in or about the month of February 1978 about the invaluable nature of the pillars and devised a stratagem to get the custody of the pillars. They discussed their stratagem with their family friend N. N. Malik, informing him that the pillars were worth a fortune. Ramlal Narang and Malik met Mehra and it was decided that Malik should file an application for temporary custody of the pillars and that Mehra should wield his influence over the Magistrate to help N. N. Malik to get such temporary custody. That was done. Temporary custody of the pillars was obtained and they were removed to Delhi in a truck at the instance of the Narang brothers to a place in Defence Colony, New Delhi. Replicas of the pillars were made by Balkrishan Rawal and Natwarlal, two eminent sculptors of Delhi under the supervision of Ramlal Narang and Omi Narang. Manu Narang also used to visit Delhi and check the progress made. The original pillars were transported to Bombay by Manu Narang and smuggled out of the country.

Fake pillars were substituted and returned by N. N. Malik to the Court. Later on, suspicion was created by the discovery of two fake pillars which were also attempted to be smuggled out of the country. The two pillars returned by N. N. Malik were then got examined by experts and were found to be fakes. Malik was presented by the Narang brothers with a Fiat car, a revolving brass bed and a sum of Rs. 70,000/-. They also paid for two pleasure trips made by Malik and his wife to Bombay. It was recited in the charge-sheet that the facts disclosed "the commission of offences under Section 406 (criminal breach of trust), Section 411 (receiving and retaining stolen property), Section 420 (cheating) Indian Penal Code and Section 25(1) of the Antiquities and Art Treasures Act, 1972, all read with Section 120-B Indian Penal Code, in pursuance of criminal conspiracy to which Manoharlal Narang, Ramlal Narang and Om Prakash Narang, H. L. Mehra and N. N. Malik (already granted pardon) were parties." It was further recited "Manoharlal Narang, Ramlal Narang and Omi Narang also abetted the commission of offences under Section 420 and Section 406 Indian Penal Code by N. N. Malik approver and these three accused were, therefore, liable for prosecution under Section 406 and Section 420 Indian Penal Code read with Section 109 Indian Penal Code and they had also committed other offences under Section 411 Indian Penal Code." It was further mentioned in the charge-sheet that Manoharlal Narang and Omi Narang were in London and that proceedings for their extradition were under way. It was also mentioned that H. L. Mehra was facing trial before the Special Magistrate, Ambala, for the offences committed by him and, therefore, he was nor being sent up for trial in this case.

It is obvious that neither at the time when the First Information Report pertaining to the Ambala case was registered nor at the time when the charge-sheet was filed in the Ambala Court, were the Narang brothers known to be in the picture. The investigating agency was not also aware of what Malik and Mehra had done with the pillars after they had obtained possession of the pillars from the Court and substituted and returned fake pillars to the Court. The First Information Report and the charge-sheet were concerned primarily with the offences of conspiracy to cheat and to misappropriate committed by Malik and Mehra. At that stage, the investigating agency was not aware of any conspiracy to send the pillars out of the country. It was not known that the Narang brothers were also parties to the conspiracy to obtain possession of the pillars from the Court. It was much later that the pillars surfaced in London and were discovered to be in the constructive possession of Narang brothers. Even then, the precise connection between Malik and Mehra on the one side and Narang brothers on the other was not known. All that was known was that the pillars which were stolen property within the definition of the expression in Section 410 Indian Penal Code were found to be in the possession of Narang brothers in London. On the discovery of the genuine pillars in the possession of Narang brothers, without anything further to connect Narang brothers with Malik and Mehra, the police had no option but to register a case under Section 411 Indian Penal Code against Narang brothers. That was what was done. No fault could, therefore, be found with the police for registering a First Information Report against the Narang brothers for the offence of conspiracy to commit an offence under Section 411 Indian Penal Code. In the course of the investigation into this offence, it transpired that the Narang brothers were also parties to the original conspiracy to obtain possession of the pillars from the Court by cheating. Facts came to light which indicated that the conspiracy, which was the subject matter of the case pending in the Ambala Court was but part of a larger conspiracy. The fresh facts which came to light resulted in the filing of the second charge-sheet. The several facts and circumstances mentioned by us earlier and a comparison of the two First Information Reports and the two charge-sheets show that the conspiracy which was the subject matter of the second case could not be said to be identical with the conspiracy which was the subject matter of the first case. The conspirators were different. Malik and Mehra alone were stated to be the conspirators in the first case, while the three Narang brothers were alleged to be the principal conspirators in the second case. The objects of the two conspiracies were different. The alleged object of the first conspiracy was to obtain possession of the pillars from the Court by cheating and to misappropriate them. The alleged object of the second conspiracy was the disposal of the stolen property by exporting the pillars to London. The offences alleged in the first case was Section 120-B read with Section 420 and Section 406 Indian Penal Code, while the offences alleged in the second case were Section 120-B read with Section 411 Indian Penal Code and Section 25 of the Antiquities and Art Treasures Act, 1972. It is true that the Antiquities and Art Treasures Act had not yet come into force on the date when the First Information Report was registered. It is also true that Omi Narang and Manu Narang were not extradited for the offence under the Antiquities and Art Treasures Act and, therefore, they could not be tried for that offence in India. But the question whether any of the accused may be tried for a contravention of the Antiquities and Art Treasures Act or under the corresponding provision of the earlier Act is really irrelevant in deciding whether the two conspiracies are one and the same. The trite argument that a Court takes cognizance of offences and not offenders was also advanced. This argument is again of no relevance in determining the question whether the two conspiracies which were taken cognizance of by the Ambala and the Delhi Courts were the same in substance. The question is not whether the nature and character of the conspiracy has changed by the mere inclusion of a few more conspirators as accused or by the addition of one more among the objects of the conspiracy. The question is whether the two conspiracies are in substance and truth the same. Where the conspiracy discovered later is found to cover a much larger canvas with broader ramifications, it cannot be equated with the earlier conspiracy which covered a smaller field of narrower dimensions. We are clear, in the present case, that the conspiracies which are the subject matter of the two cases cannot be said to be identical though the conspiracy which is the subject matter of the first case may, perhaps, be said to have turned out to be part of the conspiracy which is the subject matter of the second case. As we mentioned earlier, when investigation commenced in First Information Report No. R.C. 4 of 1976, apart from the circumstance that the property involved was the same; the link between the conspiracy to cheat and to misappropriate and the conspiracy to dispose of the stolen property was not known.

The further connected questions arising for consideration are, what was the duty of the police on discovering that the conspiracy, which was the subject matter of the earlier case, was part of a larger conspiracy, whether the police acted without jurisdiction in investigating or in continuing to investigate into the case and whether the Delhi Court acted illegally in taking cognizance of the case ?

In order to answer these questions, it is necessary to refer to the relevant provisions of the Criminal Procedure Code. Counsel on both sides argued the questions on the basis that the Old Criminal Procedure Code governed the situation. We proceed on that assumption without deciding whether the trial in the Delhi Court will be governed by the old Code or the new one.

Under the Criminal Procedure Code, 1898, whenever an officer in charge of the Police Station received information relating to the commission of a cognizable offence, he was required to enter the substance thereof in a book kept by him, for that purpose, in the prescribed form (Section 154 Criminal Procdure Code). Section 156 Criminal Procedure Code invested the Police with the power to investigate into cognizable offences without the order of a Court. If, from the information received or otherwise, the officer in charge of a Police Station suspected the commission of a cognizable offence, he was required to send forthwith a report of the same to a Magistrate empowered to take cognizance of such offence upon a police report and than to proceed in person or depute one of his subordinate officers to proceed to the spot, to investigate the facts and circumstances of the case and to take measures for the discovery and arrest of the offender (Section 157 Criminal Procedure Code). He was required to complete the investigation without unnecessary delay, and, as soon as it was completed, to forward to a Magistrate empowered to take cognizance of the offence upon a police report, a report in the prescribed form, setting forth the names of the parties, the nature of the information and the names of the persons who appeared to be acquainted with the circumstances of the case (Section 173(1) Criminal Procedure Code). He was also required to state whether the accused had been forwarded in custody or had been released on bail. Upon receipt of the report submitted under Section 173(1) Criminal Procedure Code by the officer incharge of the Police Station, the Magistrate empowered to take cognizance of an offence upon a police report might take cognizance of the offence (Section 190(1)

(b) Criminal Procedure Code). Thereafter, if, in the opinion of the Magistrate taking cognizance of the offence, there was sufficient ground for proceeding, the Magistrate was required to issue the necessary process to secure the attendance of the accused (Section 204 Criminal Procedure Code). The scheme of the Code thus was that the First Information Report was followed by investigation, the investigation led to the submission of a report to the Magistrate, the Magistrate took cognizance of the offence on receipt of the police report and, finally, the Magistrate taking cognizance issued process to the accused.

The police thus had the statutory right and duty to 'register' every information relating to the commission of a cognizable offence. The police also had the statutory right and duty to investigate the facts and circumstances of the case where the commission of a cognizable offence was suspected and to submit the report of such investigation to the Magistrate having jurisdiction to take cognizance of the offence upon a police report. These statutory rights and duties of the police were not circumscribed by any power of superintendence or interference in the Magistrate; nor was any sanction required from a Magistrate to empower the Police to investigate into a cognizable offence. This position in law was well established. In King Emperor v. Khwaja Nazir Ahmed(1), the Privy Council observed as follows:

"Just as it is essential that every one accused of a crime should have free access to a Court of justice, so that he may be duly acquitted if found not guilty of the offence with which he is charged, so it is of the utmost importance that the judiciary should not interfere with the police in matters which are within their province and into which the law imposes on them the duty of inquiry. In India, as has been shown, there is a statutory right on the part of the police to investigate the circumstances of an alleged cognizable crime without requiring any authority from the judicial authorities, and it would, as their Lordships think, be an unfortunate result if it should be held possible to interfere with those statutory rules by an exercise of the inherent jurisdiction of the Court. The functions of the judiciary and the police are complementary, not overlapping, and the combination of individual liberty with a due observance of law and order is only to be obtained by leaving each to exercise its own function, always, of course, subject to the right of the Courts, to intervene in an appropriate case when moved under Section 491 of the Criminal Procedure Code to give directions in the nature of Habeas Corpus. In such a case as the present, however, the Court's function begin when a charge is preferred before it and not until then....... In the present case, the police have under Sections 154 and 156 of the Criminal Procedure Code, a statutory right to investigate a cognizable offence without requiring the sanction of the Court..........
Ordinarily, the right and duty of the police would end with the submission of a report under Section 173(1) Criminal Procedure Code upon receipt of which it was up to the Magistrate to take or not to take cognizance of the offence. There was no provision in the 1898 Code prescribing the procedure to be followed by the police, where, after the submission of a report under Section 173(1) Criminal Procedure Code and after the Magistrate had taken cognizance of the offence, fresh facts came to light which required further investigation. There was, of course, no express provision prohibiting the police from launching upon an investigation into the fresh facts coming to light after the submission of the report under Section 173(1) or after the Magistrate had taken cognizance of the offence. As we shall presently point out, it was generally, thought by many High Courts, though doubted by a few, that the police were not barred from further investigation by the circumstance that a report under Section 173(1) had already been submitted and a Magistrate had already taken cognizance of the offence. The Law Commission in its 41st report recognized the position and recommended that the right of the police to make further investigation should be statutorily affirmed. The Law Commission said :
"14.23. A report under Section 173 is normally the end of the investigation. Sometimes, however, the police officer after submitting, the report under Section 173 comes upon evidence bearing on the guilt or innocence of the accused. We should have thought that the police officer can collect that evidence and send it to the Magistrate concerned. It appears, however, that Courts have sometimes taken the narrow view that once a final report under Section 173 has been sent, the police cannot touch the case again and cannot re- open the investigation. This view places a hindrance in the way of the investigating agency, which can be very unfair to the prosecution and, for that matter, even to the accused. It should be made clear in Section 173 that the competent police officer can examine such evidence and send a report to the Magistrate. Copies concerning the fresh material must of course be furnished to the accused".
Accordingly, in the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973, a new provision, Section 173(8), was introduced and it says:

"Nothing in this section shall be deemed to preclude further investigation in respect of an offence after a report under sub-section (2) has been forwarded to the Magistrate and, where upon such investigation, the officer in charge of the police Station obtains further evidence, oral or documentary, he shall forward to the Magistrate a further report or reports regarding such evidence in the form prescribed, and the provisions of sub-sections (2) to (6) shall, as far as may be, apply in relation to such report or reports as they apply in relation to a report forwarded under sub section (2)".
The right of the police to make repeated investigations under the old Code was recognised by the Madras High Court as early as in 1919 in Divakar Singh v. A. Ramamurthi Naidu (1), where Phillips and Krishnan, JJ., observed as follows:

"Another contention is put forward that when a report of investigation has been sent in under Section 173, Criminal P.C., the police has no further powers of investigation, but this argument may be briefly met by the remark that the number of investigations into a crime is not limited by law and that when one has been completed another may be begun on further information received".
In re. Palaniswami Goundan(1) the Madras High Court held that notwithstanding the filing of a final charge- sheet, a police officer could still investigate and lay further charge-sheets if he got information and that there was no finality either to the investigation or to the laying of charge-sheets. In Md. Niwaz v. The Crown(2) a Bench of the Lahore High Court consisting of Din Mohammad and Cornelius JJ., cited with approval the decision of the Division Bench of the Madras High Court in Divakar Singh v. A. Ramamurthi Naidu(3) already referred to by us. In Prosecuting Inspector v. Minaketan Mahato(4), the High Court of Orissa held that the police had the right to reopen investigation even after the submission of the charge-sheet under Section 173 Criminal Procedure Code if fresh facts came to light. In Rama Shanker v. State of U.P.(5) a Division Bench of Allahabad High Court took the view that the submission of a charge-sheet not being a judicial act, the submission of a fresh charge-sheet after submission of a report under Section 173 Criminal Procedure Code was not illegal. In re. State of Kerala v. State Prosecutor(6) a Division Bench of the Kerala High Court thought it was well settled law that the police had the right to reopen the investigation even after the submission of a charge-sheet under Section 173 Criminal Procedure Code and that there was no bar for further investigation or for filing of supplementary report.

In H. N. Rishbud v. The State of Delhi(7),this Court contemplated the possibility of further investigation even after a Court had taken cognizance of the case. While noticing that a police report resulting from an investigation was provided in Section 190 Criminal Procedure Code as the material on which cognizance was taken, it was pointed out that it could not be maintained that a valid and legal police report was the foundation of the jurisdiction of the Court to take cognizance.

It was held that where cognizance of the case had, in fact, been taken and the case had proceeded to termination, the invalidity of the precedent investigation did not vitiate the result unless miscarriage of justice had been caused thereby. It was said that a defect or illegality in investigation, however serious, had no direct bearing on the competence of the procedure relating to cognizance or trial. However, it was observed:

"It does not follow that the invalidity of the investigation is to be completely ignored by a Court during trial. When the breach of such a mandatory provision is brought to the knowledge of the Court at a sufficiently early stage, the Court, while not declining cognizance, will have to take the necessary steps to get the illegality cured and the defect rectified, by ordering such re-investigation as the circumstances of an individual case may call for".
This decision is a clear authority for the view that further investigation is not altogether ruled out merely because cognizance of the case has been taken by the Court; defective investigation coming to light during the course of a trial may be cured by a further investigation, if circumstances permit it.

In Tara Singh v. State(1) the police first submitted a report styled as "an incomplete challan", which, however, contained all the particulars prescribed by Section 173(1). Later, two supplemental challans were submitted containing the names of certain formal witnesses. The Magistrate had taken cognizance of the case when the incomplete challan was submitted. It was urged that the Magistrate had taken cognizance of the case illegally and the statements of witneses examined before submission of the supplemental challans should be excluded from the record. This Court held that the so called incomplete challan was in fact a complete report of the kind contemplated by Section 173(1) (a), and, therefore, the Magistrate had properly taken cognizance of the case. The Court declined to express any opinion on the question whether the police could be permitted to send incomplete reports under Section 173(1) Criminal Procedure Code. This case while neither approving nor disapproving the practice of submitting incomplete challans in the first instance, certainly notices the existence of such practice.

Some High Courts took the view that with the submission of a charge-sheet under Section 173 the power of the police to investigate came to an end and the Magistrate's cognizance of the offence started.

It was said that any further investigation by the police would trench upon the magisterial cognizance. Vide-Ram Gopal Neotia v. State of West Bengal(1). In Hanuman & Anr. v. Raj.(2) it was held that when a case was pending before a Magistrate, the action of the police in resuming investigation and putting up a new challan against a person not originally an accused as a result of the further investigation was unauthorised and unlawful. In State v. Mehar Singh & Ors.(3), a Full Bench of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana held that the police became functus officio once the Court took cognizance of an offence on the filing of a charge-sheet by the police and thereafter further investigation by the police was not permissible. The police, it was said, could not 'tinker' with the proceedings pending in the Court. It was, however, observed that it would be open to the Magistrate to 'suspend cognizance' and direct the police to make further investigation into the case and submit a report. The High Court of Punjab and Haryana acknowledged the existence of the practice of submitting supplemental charge-sheets, but was of the view that such practice was not sanctioned by the Code. Faced with the impracticality of banning all further investigation once cognizance of an offence was taken by the Court, the High Court tried to find a solution to the problem by suggesting the procedure of the Magistrate suspending cognizance and ordering further investigation. The procedure of 'suspending cognizance' suggested by the High Court of Punjab and Haryana does not appear to us to be warranted by the provisions of the Criminal Procedure Code.

Anyone acquainted with the day today working of the criminal courts will be alive to the practical necessity of the police possessing the power to make further investigation and submit a supplemental report. It is in the interests of both the prosecution and the defence that the police should have such power. It is easy to visualise a case where fresh material may come to light which would implicate persons not previously accused or absolve persons already accused. When it comes to the notice of the investigating agency that a person already accused of an offence has a good alibi, is it not the duty of that agency to investigate the genuineness of the plea of alibi and submit a report to the Magistrate ? After all the investigating agency has greater resources at its command than a private individual. Similarly, where the involvement of persons who are not already accused comes to the notice of the investigating agency, the investigating agency cannot keep quiet and refuse to investigate the fresh information. It is their duty to investigate and submit a report to the Magistrate upon the involvement of the other persons. In either case, it is for the Magistrate to decide upon his future course of action depending upon the stage at which the case is before him. If he has already taken cognizance of the offence, but has not proceeded with the enquiry or trial, he may direct the issue of process to persons freshly discovered to be involved and deal with all the accused, in a single enquiry or trial. If the case of which he has previously taken cognizance has already proceeded to some extent, he may take fresh cognizance of the offence disclosed against the newly involved accused and proceed with the case as a separate case. What action a Magistrate is to take in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure in such situations is a matter best left to the discretion of the Magistrate. The criticism that a further investigation by the police would trench upon the proceedings before the Court is really not of very great substance, since whatever the police may do, the final discretion in regard to further action is with the Magistrate. That the final word is with the Magistrate is sufficient safeguard against any excessive use or abuse of the power of the police to make further investigation. We should not, however, be understood to say that the police should ignore the pendency of a proceeding before a Court and investigate every fresh fact that comes to light as if no cognizance had been taken by the Court of any offence. We think that in the interests of the independence of the magistracy and the judiciary, in the interests of the purity of the administration of criminal justice and in the interests of the comity of the various agencies and institutions entrusted with different stages of such administration, it would ordinarily be desirable that the police should inform the Court and seek formal permission to make further investigation when fresh facts come to light.

As observed by us earlier, there was no provision in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 which, expressly or by necessary implication, barred the right of the police to further investigate after cognizance of the case had been taken by the Magistrate. Neither Section 173 nor Section 190 lead us to hold that the power of the police to further investigate was exhausted by the Magistrate taking cognizance of the offence. Practice, convenience and preponderance of authority, permitted repeated investigations on discovery of fresh facts. In our view, notwithstanding that a Magistrate had taken cognizance of the offence upon a police report submitted under Section 173 of the 1898 Code, the right of the police to further investigate was not exhausted and the police could exercise such right as often as necessary when fresh information came to light. Where the police desi ed to make a further investigation, the police could express their regard and respect for the Court by seeking its formal permission to make further investigation.

As in the present case, occasions may arise when a second investigation started independently of the first may disclose a wide range of offences including those covered by the first investigation. Where the report of the second investigation is submitted to a Magistrate other than the Magistrate who has already taken cognizance of the first case, it is up to the prosecuting agency or the accused concerned to take necessary action by moving the appropriate superior Court to have the two cases tried together. The Magistrates themselves may take action suo motu. In the present case, there is no problem since the earlier case has since been withdrawn by the prosecuting agency. It was submitted to us that the submission of a charge-sheet to the Delhi Court and the withdrawal of the case in the Ambala Court amounted to an abuse of the process of the Court. We do not think that the prosecution acted with any oblique motive. In the charge-sheet filed in the Delhi Court, it was expressly mentioned that Mehra was already facing trial in the Ambala Court and he was, therefore, not being sent for trial. In the application made to the Ambala Court under Section 494 Criminal Procedure Code, it was expressly mentioned that a case had been filed in the Delhi Court against Mehra and others and, therefore, it was not necessary to prosecute Mehra in the Ambala Court. The Court granted its permission for the withdrawal of the case. Though the investigating agency would have done better if it had informed the Ambala Magistrate and sought his formal permission for the second investigation, we are satisfied that the investigating agency did not act out of any malice. We are also satisfied that there has been no illegality. Both the appeals are, therefore, dismissed.

M.R.					  Appeals dismissed.




================================================================================


================================================================================
CASE 4: 
[Cites 50, Cited by 154]
Supreme Court of India
Vijay Kumar Ghai vs The State Of West Bengal on 22 March, 2022
Author: Krishna Murari
Bench: Krishna Murari, S. Abdul Nazeer
                                                                          REPORTABLE

                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                  CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                    CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 463 OF 2022
                               (arising out of S.L.P (Crl.) No. 10951 OF 2019)


         VIJAY KUMAR GHAI & ORS.                                 …     APPELLANT(S)

                                                  VERSUS

         THE STATE OF WEST BENGAL & ORS.                         …     RESPONDENT(S)



                                                JUDGMENT
KRISHNA MURARI, J.


Leave granted.


2. This appeal is directed against the judgment and order dated 01.10.2019 passed by the High Court of Calcutta (hereinafter referred to as “High Court”) in C.R.R No. 731 of 2017 filed by the appellants praying for quashing of proceedings being G.R. Case No. 1221 of 2013 pending before the Court of Learned Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Kolkata and arising out of Bowbazar Police Station Case No. 168 dated 28.03.2013 under Sections 420, 406 and 120B of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter referred to as “IPC”).


By the said judgment, the High Court dismissed the prayer for 17:11:34 IST Reason:


quashing of the proceedings and held that continuance of criminal proceedings against the present appellant/accused would not be an abuse of the process of the court.
3. Brief facts necessary for the disposal of this appeal are as under:
3.1 M/s. Priknit Retails Limited a public limited company having its registered office at BXXV, 539A, 10, Jalandhar, Bye Pass Road, Ludhiana, Punjab was incorporated in the year 2002 and subsequently changed its name to Priknit Apparels in 2007. The company is engaged in the manufacture and trade of apparels through chain of retail stores under the brand name and style of Priknit. Appellant No. 1 is the Managing Director of the Company and Appellant Nos. 2 and 3 are the Directors of the said Company. The company has been arrayed as proforma Respondent No. 3. 3.2 In January 2008, Respondent No. 2 an authorized representative of SMC Global Securities Ltd, Delhi desired to make an investment on its behalf with the appellants. It was mutually decided between the parties that Respondent No. 2 will invest an amount of Rs. 2.5 crore with the company in lieu of which they will be issued 2,50,000 equity shares of Priknit Apparel Pvt.
Ltd. Subsequently, Respondent No. 2 filed their share application form along with the cheque of Rs. 2.5 crore.

3.3 Subsequently, an allotment letter dated 29.03.2008 was issued in favour of Respondent No. 2 whereby 2,50,000 shares were issued in lieu of the investment made by him. The proforma respondent no. 3 company and Respondent No. 2 arrived at an understanding, regarding the investment made by Respondent No. 2.

3.4 Having failed to bring the I.P.O as per memorandum of understanding dated 20.08.2009, Respondent No. 2 issued a legal notice dated 06.12.2011 to the Appellants, who duly replied to the legal notice denying all the allegations contained in the legal notice.

3.5 That on 06.01.2012, Respondent No. 2 filed a police complaint with PS Rajender Nagar, New Delhi and the concerned officer of PS Rajender Nagar apprised Respondent No. 2 that the complaint does not pertain to their jurisdiction and therefore the same ought to be transferred. On 11.04.2012, Respondent No. 2 filed a complaint with the Economic Offences Wing (hereinafter referred to as “EOW”) and the said complaint was transferred to PS Darya Ganj, New Delhi.

3.6 That on 06.06.2012, Respondent No. 2 filed a complaint being CC No. 306/1/12 under Section 156(3) of Cr.P.C before the Tiz Hazari Court, New Delhi for registration of FIR against the Appellants and their company. On 01.09.2012, Respondent No. 2 also filed another Complaint No. 190 of 12 before Tis Hazari Court, New Delhi under Section 68 of the Companies Act read with Section 200 of Cr.P.C which is pending adjudication. 3.7 That the Metropolitan Magistrate (hereinafter referred to as “MM”), Tis Hazari vide order dated 28.02.2013 observed that the entire dispute raised by Respondent No. 2 was civil in nature and there was no criminality involved, thereby turning down the prayer of Respondent No. 2 for registration of an FIR and posted the case for pre-summoning evidence with regard to the application under Section 156(3) Cr.P.C filed by Respondent No.2. It is pertinent to mention here that the order of the MM, Tis Hazari Court, New Delhi attained finality as it was not put to further challenge. 3.8 That on 28.03.2013, Respondent No. 2 filed a second complaint under Section 406, 409, 420, 468,120B and 34 IPC on the basis of the same cause of action with the PS Bowbazar at Kolkata, West Bengal and the same was converted into an FIR bearing No. 168 under Section 406, 420, 120B IPC. A final closure report dated 04.03.2014 was filed by the concerned Police Station recommending closure of the case since the entire dispute was found to be civil in nature.

3.9 That Respondent No. 2 filed a protest petition being GR No. 1221/2013 with the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate (hereinafter referred to as “CMM”), Kolkata against closure report dated 04.03.2014 and vide order dated 08.03.2016, the CJM allowed the protest petition and directed for further investigation.

3.10 In the meantime, the authorized representative of Respondent No. 2 made a statement before the MM, Tish Hazari, New Delhi for withdrawing the complaint case.

3.11 Appellant No. 1 received a notice dated 14.11.2016 under Section 41(a) Cr.P.C for appearance before the Investigation Officer (hereinafter referred to as “IO”) at PS Bowbazar, Kolkata. In his reply to the said notice, Appellant No. 1 stated that a complaint has already been filed with the same cause of action before the Tis Hazari Court and further sought time to produce the documents sought in the notice. Thereafter, Appellant No. 1 sent a letter with all the relevant documents required for investigation thereby extending full co- operation to the IO at PS Bowbazar, Kolkata in connection with Case No. 168. The IO PS Bowbazar, Kolkata sent another notice under Section 41(a) Cr.P.C dated 23.12.2016 to Appellant No. 1 and 2 to appear before him with the relevant documents.

3.12 That vide order dated 14.02.2017, the CMM, Calcutta took cognizance of the offence under Section 406, 420, 120B IPC in connection with Case No. 168 dated 28.03.2013 corresponding to GR Case No. 1221 of 2013 i.e., protest petition.

3.13 Being aggrieved, Appellants herein filed a quashing petition being CRR No. 731 of 2017 under Section 482 Cr.P.C seeking quashing of FIR No. 168 dated 28.03.2013 and also impugned the proceedings in GR Case No. 1221 of 2013 by invoking Sections 401 and 482 Cr.P.C.

3.14 That the High Court vide order dated 06.03.2017 issued notice to the Respondents and stayed further proceeding of criminal case. Respondent No. 2 filed an application for vacation of the stay order granted by the High Court but the same was dismissed vide order dated 24.03.2017 while observing that Respondent No. 2 had also filed a complaint at Delhi on the same allegations, thus the proceedings at Calcutta were intended to harass the Appellants. 3.15 However, the High Court vide impugned judgment and order dated 01.10.2019 dismissed the quashing as well as the revision petition filed by the Appellants and observed that in order to exercise the power under Section 482 Cr.P.C, the only requirement is to see whether continuance of the criminal proceedings would be a total abuse of the process of the court and the continuance of the criminal proceedings against the appellants is in no way an abuse of the process of the court. The operative portion of the aforesaid judgment reads as under: -


“In the present case, the allegation in the FIR disclosed the offences alleged. Moreover, the allegations made in the FIR disclosed that the petitioner induced the complainant to purchase share or invest money by willful misrepresentation.
 It is true that the complaint discloses that there was a commercial transaction between the parties but at the same time, it cannot be overlooked that the averments made in the complaint/FIR prima facie revel the commission of a cognizable offence.
Moreover, when the complaint discloses that the commercial transaction between involve criminal offences, then the question of quashing the complaint cannot be allowed.” Contentions on behalf of Appellants
4. Ms. Menaka Guruswamy, learned senior advocate appearing on behalf of the appellants has vehemently submitted that Respondent No.2 indulged in the practice of forum shopping by filing 2 complaints i.e., a complaint u/s 156(3) Cr.P.C before the Tis Hazari Court, New Delhi on 06.06.2012 and a complaint which was eventually registered as FIR No. 168 u/s 406, 420, 120B IPC before PS Bowbazar, Calcutta on 28.03.2013. FIR in connection with PS Bowbazar, Calcutta was lodged during the pendency of the complaint case at Tis Hazari Court, New Delhi and the said fact was cleverly supressed by Respondent No. 2.
4.1 It was further submitted that initially police submitted a closure report.
However, Respondent No. 2 filed an application under Section 173(8) of Cr.P.C for further investigation which was allowed and after further investigation, charge sheet was filed against the Appellants herein. 4.2 It was vehemently submitted that the complaint filed in PS Bowbazar was the exact reproduction of the complaint filed in New Delhi with the only difference being the place of occurrence. In the complaint lodged at Delhi, the place of occurrence was shown to be the office at New Delhi and in subsequent complaint at Calcutta, the place of occurrence was changed to its office at Calcutta.

4.3 It was further submitted that the allegations contained in the FIR are purely contractual disputes of civil nature but Respondent No. 2 has given a criminal colour to it and that breach of contract does not come within the purview of cheating as defined in IPC. In addition to it, it was submitted that the transaction in question between the parties as revealed from the F.I.R was purely a sale transaction or what may be called as a commercial transaction, therefore the question of cheating does not arise at all. 4.4 It was further submitted that there are no allegations in the complaint filed by the Respondent No. 2 about the Appellants having fraudulent or dishonest intentions at the time of making the representation. 4.5 It was also further submitted that the High Court failed to appreciate that the two allegations recorded in the complaint against the Appellants being belated allotment of shares to the complainant company and the Appellant No. 1’s failure to bring out an IPO are clearly commercial disputes with no element of criminality.

4.6 It was further submitted that the High Court failed to appreciate that a mere failure to keep a promise does not create any presumption of a dishonest intention amounting to a criminal breach of trust under Section 409 IPC or cheating under Section 420 IPC.

4.7 Heavy reliance was placed on the decisions of this Court in V.Y.Jose & Anr. Vs. State of Gujarat & Anr.1, Murari Lal Gupta Vs. Gopi Singh2; K. Jayaram and Ors. Vs. Bangalore Development Authority & Ors. 3; Union of India and Ors. Vs. Shantiranjan Sarkar4.

Contentions on behalf of Respondents

5. Mrs. Anjana Prakash, learned senior advocate appearing on behalf of the Respondents has vehemently submitted that the allegations contained in the complaint disclosed all the ingredients of the alleged offences and moreover, the criminal proceedings have not been initiated with mala fide intention and that the complaint case filed before the magistrate of Tis Hazari Court was not decided on merit and as such the complainant cannot be barred from making a fresh complaint.

1 (2009) 3 SCC 78 2 (2005) 13 SCC 699 3 2021 SCC OnLine SC 1194 4 (2009) 3 SCC 90 5.1 It was further submitted that the complaint at Kolkata had been filed only after the prayer u/s 156(3) Cr.P.C was rejected by the Delhi Court on 28.02.2013 in order to avail legal remedies available and when the Calcutta Court on 08.03.2016 allowed further investigation, the Respondent in order to avoid multiplicity of proceedings, withdrew the complaint in Delhi on 09.09.2016.

5.2 It was further submitted that it is an established proposition of law that two complaints can co-exist simultaneously if the scope of two complaints are different. Reliance in support of the contention was placed on the judgment of this Court in K. Jagadish Vs. Udaya Kumar G.S. & Anr. 5, wherein it was reiterated that two remedies ie. civil and criminal are not mutually exclusive but can co-exist since they essentially differ in their context and consequence. 5.3 It was also submitted that the established principle of quashing is that at the stage of cognizance all that a Court is required to see if prima facie an offence is made out and courts should restrain itself from throttling legitimate prosecutions at the threshold and the law should be allowed to take its course. Substantiating the same, it was submitted that the complainant has made a specific allegation that on inducement of the accused persons, he had parted with 2.50 crore on a false promise that they would be allotted shares in the company. On 29.02.2008, a false statement was made by the accused persons that the complainant had been allotted the shares, whereas it 5 (2020) 14 SCC 552 transpired that the resolution about the allotment of shares was taken only on 23.03.2009 that is one year later.

5.4 Strong reliance was placed on the decisions of this Court in V. Ravi Kumar Vs. State and Ors.6; Indian Oil Corporation Vs. NEPC India Ltd. & Ors.7; A.V. Mohan Rao & Anr. Vs. M Kishan Rao & Anr. 8; K. Jagadish (Supra).


6. We have carefully considered the submissions made at the Bar and perused the materials placed on record.


7. Predominantly, the Indian Judiciary has time and again reiterated that forum shopping take several hues and shades but the concept of ‘forum shopping’ has not been rendered an exclusive definition in any Indian statute. Forum shopping as per Merriam Webster dictionary is:-

“The practice of choosing the court in which to bring an action from among those courts that could properly exercise jurisdiction based on determination of which court is likely to provide the most favourable outcome”
8. The Indian judiciary’s observation and obiter dicta has aided in streamlining the concept of forum shopping in the Indian legal system. This Court has condemned the practice of forum shopping by litigants and termed it 6 (2019) 14 SCC 568 7 (2006) 6 SCC 736 8 (2002) 6 SCC 174 as an abuse of law and also deciphered different categories of forum shopping.


9. A two-Judge bench of this Court in Union of India & Ors. Vs. Cipla Ltd. & Anr.9 has laid down factors which lead to the practice of forum shopping or choice of forum by the litigants which are as follows:-

“148. A classic example of forum shopping is when litigant approaches one Court for relief but does not get the desired relief and then approaches another Court for the same relief. This occurred in Rajiv Bhatia Vs. Govt. of NCT of Delhi and Others10. The respondent-mother of a young child had filed a petition for a writ of habeas corpus in the Rajasthan High Court and apparently did not get the required relief from that Court. She then filed a petition in the Delhi High Court also for a writ of habeas corpus and obtained the necessary relief. Notwithstanding this, this Court did not interfere with the order passed by the Delhi High Court for the reason that this Court ascertained the views of the child and found that she did not want to even talk to her adoptive parents and therefore the custody of the child granted by the Delhi High Court to the respondent- mother was not interfered with. The decision of this Court is on its own facts, even though it is a classic case of forum shopping.
149. In Arathi Bandi v. Bandi Jagadrakshaka Rao & Ors.11this Court noted that jurisdiction in a Court is not attracted by the operation or creation of fortuitous circumstances. In that case, circumstances were created by one of the parties to the dispute to confer jurisdiction on a particular High Court. This was frowned upon by this Court by observing that to allow the assumption of jurisdiction in created circumstances would only result in encouraging forum shopping.
150. Another case of creating circumstances for the purposes of forum shopping was World Tanker Carrier 9 (2017) 5 SCC 262 10 (1999) 8 SCC 525 11 (2013) 15 SCC 790  Corporation v. SNP Shipping Services Pvt. Ltd. and others12 wherein it was observed that the respondent/plaintiff had made a deliberate attempt to bring the cause of action namely a collision between two vessels on the high seas within the jurisdiction of the Bombay High Court. Bringing one of the vessels to Bombay in order to confer jurisdiction on the Bombay High Court had the character of forum shopping rather than anything else.
151. Another form of forum shopping is taking advantage of a view held by a particular High Court in contrast to a different view held by another High Court. In Ambica Industries v. Commissioner of Central Excise (2007) 6 SCC 769 the assesse was from Lucknow. It challenged an order passed by the Customs, Excise and Service Tax Appellate Tribunal (the CESTAT) located in Delhi before the Delhi High Court. The CESTAT had jurisdiction over the States of Uttar Pradesh, NCT of Delhi and Maharashtra. The Delhi High Court did not entertain the proceedings initiated by the assessee for want of territorial jurisdiction. Dismissing the assessee’s appeal this Court gave the example of an assessee affected by an assessment order in Bombay invoking the jurisdiction of the Delhi High Court to take advantage of the law laid down by the Delhi High Court or an assessee affected by an order of assessment made at Bombay invoking the jurisdiction of the Allahabad High Court to take advantage of the law laid down by it and consequently evade the law laid down by the Bombay High Court. It was said that this could not be allowed and circumstances such as this would lead to some sort of judicial anarchy.
155. The decisions referred to clearly lay down the principle that the court is required to adopt a functional test vis-à-vis the litigation and the litigant. What has to be seen is whether there is any functional similarity in the proceedings between one court and another or whether there is some sort of subterfuge on the part of a litigant. It is this functional test that will determine whether a litigant is indulging in forum shopping or not.” 12 (1998) 5 SCC 310
10. Forum shopping has been termed as disreputable practice by the courts and has no sanction and paramountcy in law. In spite of this Court condemning the practice of forum shopping, Respondent No. 2 filed two complaints i.e., a complaint u/s 156(3) Cr.P.C before the Tis Hazari Court, New Delhi on 06.06.2012 and a complaint which was eventually registered as FIR No. 168 u/s 406, 420, 120B IPC before PS Bowbazar, Calcutta on 28.03.2013. ie., one in Delhi and one complaint in Kolkata. The Complaint filed in Kolkata was a reproduction of the complaint filed in Delhi except with the change of place occurrence in order to create a jurisdiction.

11. A two-Judge bench of this Court in Krishna Lal Chawla & Ors. Vs. State of U.P. & Anr.13 observed that multiple complaints by the same party against the same accused in respect of the same incident is impermissible. It held that Permitting multiple complaints by the same party in respect of the same incident, whether it involves a cognizable or private complaint offence, will lead to the accused being entangled in numerous criminal proceedings. As such he would be forced to keep surrendering his liberty and precious time before the police and the courts, as and when required in each case.

12. The legality of the second FIR was extensively discussed by this Court in T.T. Antony Vs. State of Kerala & Ors.14. It was held that there can be no second FIR where the information concerns the same cognisable offence 13 (2021) 5 SCC 435 14 (2001) 6 SCC 181 alleged in the first FIR or the same occurrence or incident which gives rise to one or more cognizable offences. It was further held that once an FIR postulated by the provisions of Section 154 of Cr.P.C has been recorded, any information received after the commencement of investigation cannot form the basis of a second FIR as doing so would fail to comport with the scheme of the Cr.P.C. The Court further held that barring situations in which a counter- case is filed, a fresh investigation or a second FIR on the basis of the same or connected cognizable offence would constitute an "abuse of the statutory power of investigation" and may be a fit case for the exercise of power either under Section 482 of Cr.P.C or Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India

13. A two-Judge bench of this Court in K. Jayaram and Ors. Vs. Bangalore Development Authority & Ors.15 observed:

“16. It is necessary for us to state here that in order to check multiplicity of proceedings pertaining to the same subject-matter and more importantly to stop the menace of soliciting inconsistent orders through different judicial forums by suppressing material facts either by remaining silent or by making misleading statements in the pleadings in order to escape the liability of making a false statement, we are of the view that the parties have to disclose the details of all legal proceedings and litigations either past or present concerning any part of the subject-matter of dispute which is within their knowledge. In case, according to the parties to the dispute, no legal proceedings or court litigations was or is pending, they have to mandatorily state so in their pleadings in order to resolve the dispute between the parties in accordance with law.” 15 2021 SCC OnLine SC 1194
14. The genesis of the present appeal originates from the impugned order pronounced by the High Court whereby the High Court dismissed the application filed under Section 482 as well as 401 Cr.P.C. Taking that into concern, it is necessary to advert to the principles settled by judicial pronouncements laying down the circumstances under which High Court can exercise its inherent powers under Section 482 Cr.P.C.

15. This Court in the widely celebrated judgment of State of Haryana & Ors. Vs. Bhajan Lal & Ors.16 considered in detail the scope of the High Court powers under Section 482 Cr.P.C. and/or Article 226 of the Constitution of India to quash the FIR and referred to several judicial precedents and held that the High Court should not embark upon an inquiry into the merits and demerits of the allegations and quash the proceedings without allowing the investigating agency to complete its task. At the same time, this Court identified the following cases in which FIR/complaint can be quashed:

“102. (1) Where the allegations made in the first information report or the complaint, even if they are taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety do not prima facie constitute any offence or make out a case against the accused.
(2) Where the allegations in the first information report and other materials, if any, accompanying the FIR do not disclose a cognizable offence, justifying an investigation by police officers under Section 156(1) of the Code except under an order of a Magistrate within the purview of Section 155(2) of the Code.
(3) Where the uncontroverted allegations made in the FIR or complaint and the evidence collected in support of the
16 1992 Supp (1) SCC 335  same do not disclose the commission of any offence and make out a case against the accused.

(4) Where the allegations in the FIR do not constitute a cognizable offence but constitute only a non-cognizable offence, no investigation is permitted by a police officer without an order of a Magistrate as contemplated under Section 155(2) of the Code.

(5) Where the allegations made in the FIR or complaint are so absurd and inherently improbable on the basis of which no prudent person can ever reach a just conclusion that there is sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused.

(6) Where there is an express legal bar engrafted in any of the provisions of the Code or the Act concerned (under which a criminal proceeding is instituted) to the institution and continuance of the 21 proceedings and/or where there is a specific provision in the Code or the Act concerned, providing efficacious redress for the grievance of the aggrieved party.

(7) Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended with mala fide and/or where the proceeding is maliciously instituted with an ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance on the accused and with a view to spite him due to private and personal grudge.”

16. This Court in R.P. Kapur Vs. State of Punjab17 summarized categories of cases where inherent power can and should be exercised to quash the proceedings:-

(i) Where it manifestly appears that there is a legal bar against the institution or continuance e.g. want of sanction;
17 (1960) 3 SCR 388

 (ii) Where the allegations in the first information report or complaint taken at its face value and accepted in their entirety do not constitute the offence alleged;


(iii) Where the allegations constitute an offence, but there is no legal evidence adduced or the evidence adduced clearly or manifestly fails to prove the charge.


17. This Court in Inder Mohan Goswami & Anr. Vs. State of Uttaranchal & Ors.18 observed:-

“27. The powers possessed by the High Court under Section 482 of the Code are very wide and the very plenitude of the power requires great caution in its exercise. The court must be careful to see that its decision in exercise of this power is based on sound principles. The inherent power should not be exercised to stifle a legitimate prosecution. The High Court should normally refrain from giving a prima facie decision in a case where all the facts are incomplete and hazy; more so, when the evidence has not been collected and produced before the court and the issues involved, whether factual or legal, are of such magnitude that they cannot be seen in their true perspective without sufficient material. Of course, no hard and fast rule can be laid down in regard to cases in which the High Court will exercise its extraordinary jurisdiction of quashing the proceedings at any stage”
18. In Indian Oil Corpn. v NEPC India Ltd. & Ors. 19, a two-judge Bench of this Court reviewed the precedents on the exercise of jurisdiction under 18 (2007) 12 SCC 1 19 (2006) 6 SCC 736 Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973 and formulated guiding principles in the following terms:

“12. … (i) A complaint can be quashed where the allegations made in the complaint, even if they are taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety, do not prima facie constitute any offence or make out the case alleged against the accused. For this purpose, the complaint has to be examined as a whole, but without examining the merits of the allegations. Neither a detailed inquiry nor a meticulous analysis of the material nor an assessment of the reliability or genuineness of the allegations in the complaint, is warranted while examining prayer for quashing of a complaint.
(ii) A complaint may also be quashed where it is a clear abuse of the process of the court, as when the criminal proceeding is found to have been initiated with mala fides/malice for wreaking vengeance or to cause harm, or where the allegations are absurd and inherently improbable.
(iii) The power to quash shall not, however, be used to stifle or scuttle a legitimate prosecution. The power should be used sparingly and with abundant caution.
(iv) The complaint is not required to verbatim reproduce the legal ingredients of the offence alleged. If the necessary factual foundation is laid in the complaint, merely on the ground that a few ingredients have not been stated in detail, the proceedings should not be quashed. Quashing of the complaint is warranted only where the complaint is so bereft of even the basic facts which are absolutely necessary for making out the offence.
(v) ..”
19. A two-Judge Bench of this Court in State of Madhya Pradesh Vs. Awadh Kishore Gupta & Ors.20 made the following observation :-
“11. The powers possessed by the High Court under Section 482 of the Code are very wide and the very plenitude of the power requires great caution in its exercise. Court must be careful to see that its decision in exercise of this power is based on sound principles. The inherent power should not be exercised to stifle a legitimate prosecution. High Court being the highest Court of a State should normally refrain from giving a prima facie decision in a case where the entire facts are incomplete and hazy, more so when the evidence has not been collected and produced before the Court and the issues involved, whether factual or legal, are of magnitude and cannot be seen in their true perspective without sufficient material. Of course, no hard and fast rule can be laid down in regard to cases in which the High Court will exercise its extraordinary jurisdiction of quashing the proceeding at any stage. In proceeding instituted on complaint, exercise of the inherent powers to quash the proceedings is called for only in a case where the complaint does not disclose any offence or is frivolous, vexatious or oppressive. If the allegations set out in the complaint do not constitute the offence of which cognizance has been taken by the Magistrate, it is open to the High Court to quash the same in exercise of the inherent powers under Section 482 of the Code.”
20. This Court in G. Sagar Suri & Anr. Vs. State of UP & Ors. 21 observed that it is the duty and obligation of the criminal court to exercise a great deal of caution in issuing the process, particularly when matters are essentially of civil nature.

20 (2004) 1 SCC 691 21 (2000) 2 SCC 636

21. This Court has time and again cautioned about converting purely civil disputes into criminal cases. This Court in Indian Oil Corporation (Supra) noticed the prevalent impression that civil law remedies are time consuming and do not adequately protect the interests of lenders/creditors. The Court further observed that:-


“13. …any effort to settle civil disputes and claims, which do not involve any criminal offence, by applying pressure through criminal prosecution should be deprecated and discouraged.”
22. At the outset, Respondent No. 2/Complainant alleged that the Appellants were responsible for the offence punishable under Section 420, 405, 406, 120B IPC. Therefore, it is also imperative to examine the ingredients of the said offences and whether the allegations made in the complaint, read on their face, attract those offences under the Penal Code.

23. Section 405 of IPC defines Criminal Breach of Trust which reads as under: -

“405. Criminal breach of trust.—Whoever, being in any manner entrusted with property, or with any dominion over property, dishonestly misappropriates or converts to his own use that property, or dishonestly uses or disposes of that property in violation of any direction of law prescribing the mode in which such trust is to be discharged, or of any legal contract, express or implied, which he has made touching the discharge of such trust, or wilfully suffers any other person so to do, commits “criminal breach of trust”.
 The essential ingredients of the offense of criminal breach of trust are:-
(1) The accused must be entrusted with the property or with dominion over it, (2) The person so entrusted must use that property, or; (3) The accused must dishonestly use or dispose of that property or wilfully suffer any other person to do so in violation,
(a) of any direction of law prescribing the mode in which such trust is to be discharged, or;
(b) of any legal contract made touching the discharge of such trust.
24. “Entrustment” of property under Section 405 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 is pivotal to constitute an offence under this. The words used are, ‘in any manner entrusted with property’. So, it extends to entrustments of all kinds whether to clerks, servants, business partners or other persons, provided they are holding a position of ‘trust’. A person who dishonestly misappropriates property entrusted to them contrary to the terms of an obligation imposed is liable for a criminal breach of trust and is punished under Section 406 of the Penal Code.


25. The definition in the section does not restrict the property to movables or immoveable alone. This Court in R K Dalmia vs Delhi Administration22 held that the word ‘property’ is used in the Code in a much wider sense than the expression ‘moveable property’. There is no good reason to restrict the 22 (1963) 1 SCR 253 meaning of the word ‘property’ to moveable property only when it is used without any qualification in Section 405.


26. In Sudhir Shantilal Mehta Vs. CBI23 it was observed that the act of criminal breach of trust would, Interalia mean using or disposing of the property by a person who is entrusted with or has otherwise dominion thereover. Such an act must not only be done dishonestly but also in violation of any direction of law or any contract express or implied relating to carrying out the trust.


27. Section 415 of IPC define cheating which reads as under: -

“415. Cheating. —Whoever, by deceiving any person, fraudulently or dishonestly induces the person so deceived to deliver any property to any person, or to consent that any person shall retain any property, or intentionally induces the person so deceived to do or omit to do anything which he would not do or omit if he were not so deceived, and which act or omission causes or is likely to cause damage or harm to that person in body, mind, reputation or property, is said to “cheat”.” The essential ingredients of the offense of cheating are:
1. Deception of any person
2. (a) Fraudulently or dishonestly inducing that person-
       (i)      to deliver any property to any person: or
       (ii)     to consent that any person shall retain any property; or


(b) intentionally inducing that person to do or omit to do anything which he would not do or omit if he were no so deceived, and which act or 23 (2009) 8 SCC 1  omission causes or is likely to cause damage or harm to that person in body,mind,reputation or property.
28. A fraudulent or dishonest inducement is an essential ingredient of the offence. A person who dishonestly induces another person to deliver any property is liable for the offence of cheating.


29. Section 420 IPC defines cheating and dishonestly inducing delivery of property which reads as under: -


“420. Cheating and dishonestly inducing delivery of property. —Whoever cheats and thereby dishonestly induces the person deceived to deliver any property to any person, or to make, alter or destroy the whole or any part of a valuable security, or anything which is signed or sealed, and which is capable of being converted into a valuable security, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.”
30. Section 420 IPC is a serious form of cheating that includes inducement (to lead or move someone to happen) in terms of delivery of property as well as valuable securities. This section is also applicable to matters where the destruction of the property is caused by the way of cheating or inducement. Punishment for cheating is provided under this section which may extend to 7 years and also makes the person liable to fine.


31. To establish the offence of Cheating in inducing the delivery of property, the following ingredients need to be proved:-


1. The representation made by the person was false
2. The accused had prior knowledge that the representation he made was false.
3. The accused made false representation with dishonest intention in order to deceive the person to whom it was made.
4. The act where the accused induced the person to deliver the property or to perform or to abstain from any act which the person would have not done or had otherwise committed.
32. As observed and held by this Court in the case of Prof. R.K. Vijayasarathy & Anr. Vs. Sudha Seetharam & Anr. 24 , the ingredients to constitute an offence under Section 420 are as follows:-

i) a person must commit the offence of cheating under Section 415;
and

ii) the person cheated must be dishonestly induced to;

a) deliver property to any person; or

b) make, alter or destroy valuable security or anything signed or 24 (2019) 16 SCC 739  sealed and capable of being converted into valuable security. Thus, cheating is an essential ingredient for an act to constitute an offence under Section 420 IPC.


33. The following observation made by this Court in the case of Uma Shankar Gopalika Vs. State of Bihar & Anr. 25 with almost similar facts and circumstances may be relevant to note at this stage:-

“6. Now the question to be examined by us is as to whether on the facts disclosed in the petition of the complaint any criminal offence whatsoever is made out much less offences under Section 420/120-B IPC. The only allegation in the complaint petitioner against the accused person is that they assured the complainant that when they receive the insurance claim amounting to Rs. 4,20,000, they would pay a sum of Rs. 2,60,000 to the complainant out of that but the same has never been paid. It was pointed out that on behalf of the complainant that the accused fraudulently persuaded the complainant to agree so that the accused persons may take steps for moving the consumer forum in relation to the claim of Rs. 4,20,0000. It is well settled that every breach of contract would not give rise to an offence of cheating and only in those cases of breach of contract would amount to cheating where there was any deception played at the very inception. If the intention to cheat has developed later on, the same cannot amount to cheating. In the present case, it has nowhere been stated that at the very inception that there was intention on behalf of the accused person to cheat which is a condition precedent for an offence under 420 IPC.
“7. In our view petition of complaint does not disclose any criminal offence at all much less any offence either under Section 420 or Section 120-B IPC and the present case is a case of purely civil dispute between the parties for which remedy lies before a civil court by filing a properly constituted suit. In our opinion, in view of these facts 25 (2005) 10 SCC 336  allowing the police investigation to continue would amount to an abuse of the process of court and to prevent the same it was just and expedient for the High Court to quash the same by exercising the powers under Section 482 Cr.P.C which it has erroneously refused.”
34. There can be no doubt that a mere breach of contract is not in itself a criminal offence and gives rise to the civil liability of damages. However, as held by this court in Hridaya Ranjan Prasad Verma & Ors. Vs. State of Bihar & Anr.26, the distinction between mere breach of contract and cheating, which is criminal offence, is a fine one. While breach of contract cannot give rise to criminal prosecution for cheating, fraudulent or dishonest intention is the basis of the offence of cheating. In the case at hand, complaint filed by the Respondent No. 2 does not disclose dishonest or fraudulent intention of the appellants.


35. In Vesa Holdings Pvt. Ltd. & Anr. Vs. State of Kerala & Ors. 27, this Court made the following observation:-


“13. It is true that a given set of facts may make out a civil wrong as also a criminal offence and only because a civil remedy may be available to the complainant that itself cannot be ground to quash a criminal proceeding. The real test is whether the allegations in the complaint disclose the criminal offence of cheating or not. In the present case, there is nothing to show that at the very inception there was any inception on behalf of an accused person to cheat which is a condition precedent for an offence u/s 420 IPC. In our view, the complaint does not disclose any criminal offence at all. Criminal proceedings should not be 26 (2000) 4 SCC 168 27 (2015) 8 SCC 293  encouraged when it is found to be mala fide or otherwise an abuse of the process of the courts. Superior courts while exercising this power should also strive to serve the ends of justice. In our opinion, in view of these facts allowing the police investigation to continue would amount to an abuse of the process of the court and the High Court committed an error in refusing to exercise the power under Section 482 Cr.P.C to quash the proceedings.”
36. Having gone through the complaint/FIR and even the chargesheet, it cannot be said that the averments in the FIR and the allegations in the complaint against the appellant constitute an offence under Section 405 & 420 IPC, 1860. Even in a case where allegations are made in regard to failure on the part of the accused to keep his promise, in the absence of a culpable intention at the time of making promise being absent, no offence under Section 420 IPC can be said to have been made out. In the instant case, there is no material to indicate that Appellants had any malafide intention against the Respondent which is clearly deductible from the MOU dated 20.08.2009 arrived between the parties.


37. The entire origin of the dispute emanates from an investment made by Respondent No. 2, amounting to Rs. 2.5 crores in lieu of which 2,50,000/- equity shares were issued in the year 25.03.2008, finally culminating into the MOU dated 20.08.2009. That based on this MOU respondent No. 2 filed three complaints, two at Delhi and one at Kolkata. Thus, two simultaneous proceedings, arising from the same cause of action i.e. MOU dated 20.08.2009 were initiated by Respondent No. 2 amounting to an abuse of the process of the law which is barred. The details of the complaints are as under:-

1. On 06.06.2012, Respondent No. 2 filed a private complaint u/s 156(3) Cr.P.C with CJM, Tis Hazari Court Delhi for registration of fir against the Appellants; which was withdrawn on 19.09.2016.
2. Complaint u/s 68 of the companies act r/w section 200 crpc filed before the CMM, Tis Hazari Courts at Delhi; which is pending.
3. On 28.03.2013, a complaint was made to the P.S Bowbazar, Central Division, Kolkata which was eventually registered as FIR No. 168 u/s 406, 420, 120B IPC, 1860.
38. Respondent No. 2 filed a complaint u/s 156(3) Cr.P.C on 06.06.2012, wherein his prayer for registration of an FIR was rejected vide order dated 28.02.2013 by the MM, Tis Hazari Court, immediately after which he filed his complaint on 28.03.2013 at P.S Bowbazar, Calcutta. The timeline of filing complaints clearly indicates the malafide intention of Respondent No. 2 which was to simply harass the petitioners so as to pressurise them into shelling out the investment made by Respondent No. 2.
Malafide intention of Respondent No. 2 is culled out from following facts:-

1. At the time of filing of complaint dated 31.03.2013 at PS Bowbazar, Respondent No. 2 did not disclose about the filing of two complaints at Delhi against the appellants.
 2. After filing of closure report by the IO Bowbazar PS dated 04.03.2014, Respondent No. 2 filed a protest petition before the CMM, Kolkata where the material fact of two complaints was completely suppressed.
39. In the complaint no. 306/1/2012 dated 06.06.2012 registered before the MM, Tis Hazari Court, New Delhi, Respondent No. 2/complainant stated that:-
“(c) That, thereafter Mr. Vijay Kumar Ghai and Mr. Mohit Ghai started visiting the office of the complainant company every now and then in order to persuade the complainant company to invest in their company. It is pertinent to mention herein that they stated the complainant company that the retail business of the apparels under the PRIKNIT brand through a network of exclusive brank outlets was witnessing a growth..”
10. That it is submitted that this court has jurisdiction to try and entertain the matter as the complainant company is situated within the jurisdiction of this court. Moreover, all the business activities/transactions are being regulated and controlled at Delhi. Furthermore, the complaints filed by the complainant company are lying before the concerned police station, which also falls within the jurisdiction of this Hon’ble Court.” This clearly demonstrates that the jurisdiction has been created in Delhi as the Appellants used to visit Respondent No. 2 in order to persuade them to invest in their company and special emphasis can be laid on the fact that Respondent No. 2 himself accepted/agreed to the fact that all the transactions took place in Delhi. Therefore, registering a complaint in Kolkata is way of harassing the appellant as a complaint has already been filed in Delhi with all the necessary facts, apart from the jurisdictional issue at Kolkata.
40. The MM, Tis Hazari while dismissing the application under Section 156(3) Cr.P.C categorically observed that:-
“….In case the complainant had suffered any loss on account of the same, the necessary civil remedy lied in the form of damages, compensation and recovery. In case of breach of any term or condition of the contract, the necessary proceedings for injunction or specific performance can be initiated. But that by itself would not mean that the accused had misappropriated the amount of complainant for a year. There is nothing to show any conversion or misappropriation of money as the shares had been allotted subsequently. The parties have themselves agreed on clauses as to failure to honor their commitments providing for levy of interest on delayed payments.
There is no prima facie element of deception or dishonest inducement or misappropriation or conversion or entrustment or forgery in this case.
There is no requirement of police interference in this case. Even otherwise, the evidence in the present case is well within the reach of the complainant itself and it is well aware of the identity of accused persons and no investigation of technical nature is required which could warrant police intervention. The necessary record is withing the possession of the complainant itself and the same can always be proved on record by examining the witnesses. There is no necessity of any custodial interrogation at this stage and nothing identifiable is to be recovered from anyone.
In these circumstances, I do not deem it appropriate to exercise my discretion and get the FIR registered against the accused persons, especially when there is no necessity for police interference. The present application under Section 156(3) Cr.P.C is thus dismissed.”
41. It is pertinent to mention that Application under Section 156(3) Cr.P.C filed before the MM, Tis Hazari Court, Delhi was dismissed and there was no further challenge against the same. Instead, Respondent No. 2 chose to file a complaint with the same cause of action in Bowbazar PS, Calcutta and to further clarify, the Complaint filed in Bowbazar PS was the exact reproduction of the complaint filed before Tis Hazari Court, New Delhi with the only difference or what may be termed as ‘Jurisdictional improvement’ being in point (c) of the facts. It is reproduced in bold below:-
“(c) That, thereafter Mr. Vijay Kumar Ghai and Mr. Mohit Ghai started visiting the office and regional office of the complainant company every now and then in order to persuade the complainant company to invest in their company...”
10. That the facts mentioned above clearly disclose the commission of cognizable offences under Sections of the Indian Penal Code mentioned herein. That the accused persons approached the regional office too to persuade the head office for the aforesaid purposes therefore the cause of action also arose the local jurisdiction.”
42. The order of the High Court is seriously flawed due to the fact that in its interim order dated 24.03.2017, it was observed that the contentions put forth by the Appellant vis-à-vis two complaints being filed on the same cause of action at different places but the impugned order overlooks the said aspect and there was no finding on that issue. At the same time, in order to attract the ingredients of Section of 406 and 420 IPC it is imperative on the part of the complainant to prima facie establish that there was an intention on part of the petitioner and/or others to cheat and/or to defraud the complainant right from the inception. Furthermore it has to be prima facie established that due to such alleged act of cheating the complainant (Respondent No. 2 herein) had suffered a wrongful loss and the same had resulted in wrongful gain for the accused(appellant herein). In absence of these elements, no proceeding is permissible in the eyes of law with regard to the commission of the offence punishable u/s 420 IPC. It is apparent that the complaint was lodged at a very belated stage (as the entire transaction took place from January 2008 to August 2009, yet the complaint has been filed in March 2013 i.e., after a delay of almost 4 years) with the objective of causing harassment to the petitioner and is bereft of any truth whatsoever.
43. In view of the above facts and circumstances, the impugned order dated 01.10.2019 passed by the High Court is set aside. The impugned FIR No. 168 dated 28.03.2013 and proceedings in the file of CMM, Kolkata, West Bengal in pursuance of charge sheet dated 14.02.2017 against the appellants for the offences under Section 406, 420, 120B IPC stands quashed.
44. As a result, appeal stands allowed.
.................................J. (S. ABDUL NAZEER) ...............................J. (KRISHNA MURARI) NEW DELHI;

22nd MARCH, 2022
================================================================================


================================================================================
CASE 5:
[Cites 41, Cited by 99]
Supreme Court of India
Chandran Ratnaswami vs K.C. Palanisamy & Ors on 9 May, 2013
Equivalent citations: 2013 AIR SCW 2918, 2013 (6) SCC 740, 2013 CRI. L. J. 2938, AIR 2013 SC( CRI) 1317, 2013 (4) ABR 500, (2013) 3 CRILR(RAJ) 767, 2013 CRILR(SC MAH GUJ) 767, (2013) 7 SCALE 50, (2013) 55 OCR 856, 2013 CRILR(SC&MP) 767, 2014 (1) SCC (CRI) 447, 2013 (4) KCCR SN 361 (SC), 2014 (104) ALR SOC 4 (SC), 2014 (134) AIC (CN) 4 (SC), AIR 2013 SUPREME COURT 1952
Author: M.Y. Eqbal
Bench: M.Y. Eqbal, P. Sathasivam
                                                                             REPORTABLE
                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                    CIVIL/CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                    CIVIL APPEAL NO.__4540________OF 2013
                 [Arising out of S.L.P.(C) No.13120 OF 2013]
CHANDRAN RATNASWAMI                          APPELLANT
                                   VERSUS
K.C. PALANISAMY AND OTHERS                   RESPONDENTS
                                    WITH
             CRIMINAL APPEAL NOs.    736-737   __________OF 2013
             (Arising out of S.L.P.(Crl.) Nos.3273-3274 OF 2013)

CHANDRAN RATNASWAMI                          APPELLANT
                                   VERSUS
THE STATE & ANOTHER                          RESPONDENTS
                                     AND
             CRIMINAL APPEAL NOs.    731-733   __________OF 2013
             (Arising out of S.L.P.(Crl.) Nos.1924-1926 OF 2013)
K.C. PALANISAMY                              APPELLANT
                                   VERSUS
THE STATE & ANOTHER ETC. ETC.                      RESPONDENTS
                                    WITH
             CIVIL APPEAL NOs.    4537-4538    __________OF 2013
             (Arising out of S.L.P.(C) Nos.11342-11343 OF 2013)
K.C. PALANISAMY                              APPELLANT
                                   VERSUS
RAMASWAMY ATHAPPAN & OTHERS
ETC. ETC.                                          RESPONDENTS
                                     AND
              CRIMINAL APPEAL NOs.   734-735  __________OF 2013
             (Arising out of S.L.P.(Crl.) Nos.1947-1948 OF 2013)
PAUL RIVETT                                        APPELLANT
                                   VERSUS
THE STATE & ANOTHER                          RESPONDENTS

                                     AND
                  CONTEMPT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 166 OF 2013
                                     IN
                        S.L.P.(CRL.) NO. 9853 OF 2010
CHANDRAN RATNASWAMI                          PETITIONER
                                   VERSUS
V. BALAKRISHNAN & ANR.                             RESPONDENTS


                               J U D G M E N T
M.Y. EQBAL, J.:

Leave granted.
2. Since common questions of law are involved, these appeals have been heard together and are being disposed of by this common judgment. However, for the sake of convenience, the factual matrix giving rise to these cases as alleged in the civil appeal arising out of SLP(C) No. 13120 of 2013 is set out hereinafter.

3. The appellant – Chandran Ratnaswami, alleged to have settled in Canada since 1974, is an officer of Hamblin Watsa Investment Counsel, a wholly-owned subsidiary of Fairfax Financial Holdings Limited (in short, “Fairfax”) which is based in Canada and has also made investments in India worth more than USD 1 billion. The said appellant is also a Director on the Boards of various renowned companies including ORE Holdings Limited (in short, “ORE”), a Fairfax Group company, based in Mauritius, and has to travel to India on business commitments. The said holding company, ORE on 30th January, 2004 entered into a Joint Venture Agreement (JVA) with CG Holdings Private Limited (respondent No. 1 – K.C. Palanisamy’s company) and N. Athappan (a Singapore citizen) for constructing and developing a hotel property, a shopping complex and an IT Park of the properties owned by Cherraan Properties Limited (CPL) and Vasantha Mills Limited (VML) (respondent No.1’s companies). ORE invested Rs.75 crores and got 45% in Cheran Enterprises Private Limited (CEPL). N. Athappan invested Rs. 4 crores and got 10% in CEPL. It is alleged that as CPL and VML have immovable assets, respondent No. 1 transferred shares of CPL and VML to CEPL instead of bringing money and got 45% share holding in CEPL. Respondent No. 1 is alleged to have swindled the said Rs. 75 crores that was deposited in the bank account contrary to the JVA and transferred the immovable assets of CPL and VML, subsidiaries of CEPL. Thereupon, ORE filed Company Petition No. 76 of 2005 before the Company Law Board, Additional Principal Bench, Chennai (in short, “the CLB”) on account of the alleged acts of oppression and mismanagement indulged in by respondent No. 1. The Company Law Board by order dated 13th August, 2008 directed respondent No. 1, CG Holdings Private Limited and CEPL to return the investment of ORE and N. Athappan amounting to Rs. 79 crores with 8% interest within one year, failing which the land of VML was to be transferred to ORE and N. Athappan. It was directed that once the aforementioned amount is paid, respondent No. 1 would take control of CEPL and its subsidiaries. The Company Law Board held as under:

“17. In view of the foregoing conclusions and in exercise of the powers under Sections 397 & 398 read with Section 402 and with a view to bringing to an end the grievances of CG Holdings, KCP, ORE and Athappan, the following order is passed:
CEPL shall return a sum of Rs. 75 crores and Rs. 4 crores invested by ORE and Athappan respectively, together with simple interest at the rate of 8% per annum from the date of investment till the date of repayment within a period of 12 months in one or more instalments, commencing from 01.11.2008. While making the payment CEPL, CG Holdings and KCP shall ensure that at least 25% of the amount due is paid in every quarter. CEPL CG Holdings and KCP are at liberty to make use of the fixed deposit held by CEPL with the SBI, Erode Main Branch, free of any liens or encumbrances towards refund of the investments of ORE and Athappan. VML shall not alienate or sell any of its immoveable properties till full payment is made to ORE, in terms of this order. In the event of any failure to make the repayment within the specified time, CEPL CG Holdings, KCP and VML will duly convey the immovable properties of VML, namely, 17.15 acres of land in favour of ORE and 7.80 acres of land in favour of Athappan by executing and registering necessary deeds of conveyance in strict compliance with all applicable laws, as consideration for reduction of capital and surrender of the shares of ORE and Athappan, upon which ORE as well as Athappan will deliver the share certificates and blank transfer forms in respect of their holdings in CEPL and the subsidiaries, if any, in favour of CG Holdings and KCP. CEPL is consequently authorized to reduce its share capital and in the meantime, operation of the impugned agreements is suspended, to expedite and ensure due completion of the modalities of exit by ORE and Athappan, thereby, bringing to an end the acts complained of in the present proceedings. CEPL shall ensure necessary statutory compliances till the whole process, in accordance with the aforesaid directions, is properly completed. The parties are at liberty to apply in the event of any difficulty in implementation of the smooth exist of ORE and Athappan from CEPL.”
4. Cross appeals were filed by the parties before the High Court of Judicature at Madras and the High Court vide order dated 5th August, 2011 confirmed the order dated 13th August, 2008 passed by the CLB, in the following terms:

“54. On analysis of various aspects, Company Law Board concluded that it was no longer possible for the parties to carry out joint venture business of CEPL as per the terms of JVA. Only to have smooth exit of ORE and Athappan, the Company Law Board passed the order directing CEPL to repay Rs. 75 Crores and Rs. 4 Crores invested by ORE Holdings and Athappan respectively. By perusal of the order of Company Law Board, in our considered view, Company Law Board has elaborately gone into the issues arisen between the parties even though those objections were filed under Sections 397 and 398 of the Companies Act. As demonstrated infra, there are commonality of issues raised in both the Company Petitions, O.S. No.90 of 2007 and the petition filed before I.C.C. seeking for arbitration.
55. Criminal Cases:- The learned counsel for appellants Mr. Karthik Seshadri contended that the purport of the criminal proceedings are different and initiating of criminal complaints does not amount to waiver of arbitration. Of course, a party does not waive his right to invoke arbitration by filing criminal complaints. But what is relevant is the allegations in the plethora of criminal complaints filed at the instance of the appellants/father of KCP/respondents.
Both parties have made serious allegations of cheating, forgery, falsification of records, etc., against one another. Even before the arbitral Tribunal, the same allegations are made. The Honourable Supreme Court and the Madras High Court have held that the arbitration is not the appropriate forum if allegations of fraud, misappropriation and complicated facts are involved.

xxx xxx xxx

84. By a careful reading of the order of Company Law Board in C.P. Nos.65 and 76 of 2005, it is clear that the alleged breach of Clause 9.2 has been elaborately dealt with. Company Law Board dealt with not only the issues pertaining to the oppression and mismanagement of CEPL and also the larger issues arising between the parties. Only to ensure smooth exit of ORE and Athappan, the order dated 13.8.2008 came to be passed by the Company Law Board. It is pertinent to note that KCP had not challenged the said order of Company Law Board.

xxx xxx xxx

112. As pointed out earlier, several criminal cases have been filed and number of quash petitions also came to be filed. Of course a party does not waive his right to invoke the arbitration of the dispute by filing of criminal complaints. When a party deliberately chooses not to adopt a particular course of action, the arbitration agreement becomes inoperative and as the parties have waived or abandoned the arbitration clause, by invoking the jurisdiction of Civil Court, the doctrine of wavier applies. The appellants had the option to go before ICC even in 2005 but the appellants chose to file C.P. No.65 of 2005 and also stoutly defended C.P. No.76 of 2005 filed by ORE Holdings. Even in C.P. No.76 of 2005, the appellants have not sought for reference to arbitration. By agitating the matter before the Company law Board for nearly two years, and filing the Civil Suit in O.S. No.90 of 2007 before District Munsif’s Court, Kangeyam, by their conduct the appellants must be deemed to have given a go bye to the arbitration clause.

113. The parties have been engaged in pitched battle before the Company Law Board and orders were passed by the Company Law Board on 13.8.2008. When the matter was pending before the Company Law Board, the Company Law Board has passed interim orders at various stages. The learned counsel for plaintiffs would submit that even settlements/proposals have been made disclosing parties intentions and discovery process has been utilized. We find much force in the contention of the respondents that Athappans and Ore have spent consideration time and money before the Company Law Board. In so far as O.S. No.90 of 2007 pending before District Munsif’s Court, Kangeyam, the suit is ready ripe for trial and the respondents are diligently defending the same. Having initiated proceedings before various forums, cannot now seek to invoke arbitration as an additional remedy.

xxx xxx xxx

120. Company Appeal Nos. 21,25 to 27 and 29 of 2009:- The gist of order in C.P. Nos.65 and 76 of 2005 dated 13.8.2008 is that:-

CEPL, KCP and C.G.Holdings were to return Rs. 75 Crores to ORE and Rs. 4 Crores to Athappan. The money was to be paid within a period of one year starting 1.11.2008 with 25 percent of the same, being paid every year.
CEPL, KCP and C.G.Holdings were to utilize Rs. 20 Crores maintained in the fixed deposit at State Bank of India, Erode to pay ORE and Athappan. In the event of failure to pay the money the property of VMC situated in Coimbatore is to be transferred to ORE and Athappan in the proportion of 17.15 acres and 7.80 acres respectively. Until then VML was refrained from dealing with the property.
On receipt of money, ORE and Athappan were to surrender their shares in CEPL and CEPL shall accordingly be permitted to reduce its share capital.
The parties were given liberty to approach Company Law Board for limited purpose of overcoming difficulties in implementation of the said order.
xxx xxx xxx
145. As per Order of Company Law Board amount invested by ORE has to be refunded which of course, must be in accordance with applicable laws: be it compliance with FEMA or other Regulations, ORE, being a foreign investor- an entity of foreign origin , as per FEMA, cannot own immovable property in India. Compliance of FEMA or other applicable regulations cannot be bypassed. By the order dated 3.8.2009, Company Law Board modified its earlier order directing VML to execute the sale deed conveying immovable properties of 17.15 acres to the nominee of ORE and thereby modified its earlier order. The Order of the Company Law Board modifying its earlier order directing VML to convey the properties to ‘nominee of ORE’ is to be modified to the effect that any such conveyance should be subject to applicable laws and regulations and with required approval/permission to be obtained by ORE from the competent authorities. The Order of the Company Law Board in C.A. No.155 of 2008 is to be modified to that extent.
146. …. Company Appeal Nos. 21 and 29 of 2009 preferred by ORE and Company Appeals Nos. 25 and 26 of 2009 preferred by N. Athappan and R. Athappan are allowed. Company appeal No.27 of 2009 is disposed of modifying the order of Company Law Board dated 3.8.2009 in C.A. No.155 of 2008 to the effect that the conveyance of immovable properties to nominee of ORE is subject to all applicable laws and regulations and if need be, with necessary approval/permission to be obtained by ORE from the competent authorities.”
5. ORE and N. Athappan filed execution petitions before the CLB in December 2011 and the same are stated to be pending as on date.
6. While the proceedings before the CLB were pending, respondent No. 1 started filing multiple criminal complaints. On 27th February, 2006, respondent No. 1 filed a complaint before the Economic Offences Wing, Chennai (EOW) against ORE, Fairfax, Prem Watsa, Ramaswamy Athappan, Chandran Ratnaswami (appellant herein), Paul Rivett, M/s. Odyssey America Reinsurance Corporation and N. Athappan making them accused Nos. 1 to 8 inter alia on the following allegations:
“Through this strategic acquisition accused No. 1, through Accused No. 7 and Accused No. 4 through Accused No. 8 acquired substantial ownership and management rights in VML and CPL also. The complainant states that the sole objective of the sacrifice made by the complainant of his highly valuable prime immovable properties is the assurance of the Accused No. 3, 4, 5 & 6 that about Rs. 375 crores would be brought into the JV Company as investment and loans and projects worth thousands of crores would be commenced.
The complainant states that, as per the joint venture agreement dated 30.1.2004, M/s. Odyssey America Reinsurance Corporation, the 7th accused herein which is a subsidiary company of the Fair Fax Group and the Accused No. 2 had agreed to extend a Corporate Guarantee in favour of the lender for arranging the syndicated credit facility of US$ 65 Million (approximately Rs. 300 crores) to the JV company. In confirmation of the said fact the Accused No. 2, 3 and 4 and 8 while signing the JV agreement, cleverly included in the same, a model draft of the Irrevocable Corporate Guarantee Agreement to be furnished by the 7th accused in favour of the lender and even signed the said draft so as to make believe the complainant in no uncertain terms about their intention to honour their commitments. Thus, the joint venture business could commence only upon the 1st accused arranging for the syndicated credit facility of US$ 65 million, on the strength of the Corporate Guarantee to be given by the 7th accused.
xxx xxx xxx ….. On the one hand the accused had miserably failed to organize the funds even after the complainant had parted with the ownership rights over valuable properties held by him through VML and CPL and on the other hand they defrauded and cheated the complainant by not organizing the promised funds, upon the receipt of which alone, the complainant would be able to commence the projects worth thousand of crores.
…. From the above, it is therefore evident that the consideration of entering into the JV agreement was the promise and assurance that the accused 2 to 6 shall also arrange for a loan of Rs. 300 crores in addition to the share investment of Rs. 75 crores as stipulated under the JV agreement.
xxx xxx xxx Thus the accused have induced the complainant to enter into an agreement under the guise of a joint venture agreement which was conceived in pursuance of a criminal conspiracy with an intention of cheating. In addition to the above, the accused 4 and 8 have also obtained a gratification, amounting to approximately Rs. 37.40 cr.
from the complainant, by getting the shares of the companies allotted to them to a discounted rate, as consideration for facilitating the joint venture and for arranging the term loan thereby making wrongful gains to themselves while causing wrongful loss to the complainant. Moreover after receiving the said consideration in the form of shares at a discounted value, the accused 4 and 8 have now joined hands with M/s ORE Holdings Ltd. for gaining an illegal majority in the JV company and have thus defrauded the complainant of several crores of rupees.

Therefore, the accused Nos. 1 to 7 have committed various offences under section 120-B, read with sections 409, 420, 405, 471 and 389 among other provisions of the Indian Penal Code, which amount to the offences of Criminal Conspiracy, Cheating, Criminal Breach of Trust, making False Representation and Promises and Extortion by putting the fear of accusation of offences against the complainant among others, and have induced the complainant to part with the shares of his company and the control over the valuable immovable properties owned by him through VML and CPL on the strength of the false promises and assurances made by the accused.”

7. Since the Economic Offences Wing refused to take any action, the Respondent No.1 filed Criminal O.P. No. 9791 of 2006 before the High Court seeking direction to EOW to take action, which petition was later withdrawn. Thereafter, he filed a similar private complaint (Criminal M.P. No. 6096 of 2006) for offences under Sections 406, 406 r/w 109, 420, 467 r/w 420 IPC before the Judicial Magistrate, Perundurai which was dismissed on 13th March, 2007 holding the same to wreak vengeance and observing as under:

“7. On a careful consideration of the aforesaid complaint, depositions, and Exhibits it is unbelievable to state that the respondents have cheated and committed breach of trust, the complainant who is a former member of the Legislative assembly, a former member of the parliament and running business houses which have properties worth of the more than 100 crores of Rupees. Because, no documents were filed to show that the shares of Rs. 10/- face value of the Cheran Properties were sold in the market for Rs.60/- and the shares of Rs.10/- face value of the Vasanthi Mills were sold at Rs.105/-. It is not believable that the shares of Rs. 10/- face value was transferred to the same value of Nandakumar and paid about Rs. 22 crores as commission, as the complainant himself has admitted in the complaint that some of the respondents and the complainant have started a Joint Venture Company. The memorandum of understanding/Joint venture agreement is not submitted for the perusal of the court. In the memorandum of understanding the details to the investment of each of the parties, the shares allotted to each of them, the relief to the parties when the conditions are violated, and the court which has jurisdiction to entertain such matter. The failure to file the memorandum of understanding in the court, and the failure to give the reasons for not filing the same is not acceptable.
8. It is clearly seen from the deposition of the petitioner and the complaint that the respondents have arranged for about 17 million American Dollars through a firm Odyssey. It is also seen that the said sum is with the Cheran Holdings Private Limited and the affidavit filed in the Hon’ble High Court at Delhi confirms the same, while examining details, it is seen that a sum of 17 million American Dollars have come to Cheran Holdings Limited in which the complainant is a share holder. Hence the petitioner complainant might not have sustained any loss. There is no explanation in the complaint as to whether after the receipt of 17 million American Dollars, it was invested in the business. In the first meeting of the petitioner with the respondents, it was agreed that foreign investments are to be made accordingly the same has been done. It is seen from the deposition of the petitioner that 17 million American Dollars, it is not believable that the respondents have cheated the petitioner/complainant.

9. It is seen that on orders of Hon’ble High Court, Delhi in C.P. No.292/2004, a sum of Rs. 78 crores has to be deposited and Cheran Enterprises and Cheran Holdings Limited have not deposited in the Bank Accounts. The reasons adduced by the complainant was hold an important post in the Cheran Group of Companies for not depositing the sum into the Bank, do not seem to be accepted. Moreover, Chandran Ratnaswami has obtained powers from the petitioner for the conduct of the case and as such, he has to face the consequences of the orders of the court. On that aspect also, the petition would sustain.

xxx xxx xxx

12. The petitioner on 23.9.2005 sent an e-mail to the State Bank of India to give Bank guarantee to BSNL, that when he approached the Bank, he came to know that Chandra Ratnaswami and Athappan Ramaswamy have sent independent letters to the Bank requiring that the request of the petitioner should not be accepted. It cannot be considered by the Court as a criminal act. It can be considered as an act of safe guard in the trade. The proceedings between the petitioner and respondents are of civil nature relating to contract Act and Company Law. If the conditions therefore are violated, the petitioner has to seek remedy under Contract Act or Company Law. Instead the filing of this case terming the respondents as accused the court considers that it cannot be accepted.

13. On world level, the foreign investments made in each country enhance the economy and it is a day to day commercial activities. The petitioner and the respondents and some others, with an intention to establish a joint venture company having done so, have to take steps for the developmental activities, and one party should not, with intention to wreak vengeance against the other should not, term them as accused and approach the court, and this court cannot accept it. Because, the petitioner has not handed over any property to the respondents under section 406 IPC. Hence there is no ingredient for breach of trust. In the circumstances that the respondents have arranged for 17 million American Dollars, that Chandran Ratnaswamy himself has agreed to the Rs.78 crores case in the Hon’ble High Court, Delhi that the petitioner has not mentioned in the complaint that date, time and place where he was cheated, that like wise, the Respondent cheated the petitioner and thereby he sustained loss, and that there are no ingredients for sections 420, 467 read with 420 are found in the complaint or depositions. Therefore, no prima facie case to show that the respondents with criminal intention indulged in criminal activities is found in the complaint, or depositions or documents.

14. Hence, for the reasons as aforesaid, this petition is dismissed under Section 203 of Cr. P.C.”

8. Respondent No. 1 then filed another similar complaint before Judicial Magistrate, Kangayam suppressing the fact of filing earlier complaints and the order dated 13th March, 2007 passed by the Magistrate Perundurai, whereupon the Crime Branch, Erode was directed to register an FIR. Accordingly, FIR No. 7 of 2007 was registered by Police Station DCB, Erode under Sections 120-B, 420, 169, 408, 409 IPC, but the case was said to have been closed on 20th May, 2009 and the police filed the Closure Report. Meanwhile, Criminal O.P. Nos. 12695 and 19384 of 2007 had been filed for quashing the FIR by the persons shown as accused in the said FIR, in which the High Court vide order dated 8th February, 2010 frowned upon the conduct of respondent No. 1 in the following terms:

“3. It is brought to the notice of this court by the learned Senior Counsel Mr. Habibullah Basha, appearing for the accused/petitioners 1 to 3 in Crl.O.P. No.12695 that the de facto complainant, on the very same allegations preferred a complaint in C.C. No.1096 of 2006 on the file of the learned District Munsif-cum-Judicial Magistrate Court at Perundurai and the said court was pleased to pass an order of dismissal under Section 203 Cr.P.C. It is impressed upon this court that such dismissal came about after consideration of the complaint and the statement of the witnesses and on finding no ground to proceed thereon.
4. Though in view of the submission made by the learned Government Advocate (Crl.side) nothing survives for consideration in the matter, this Court would frown upon the conduct of the defacto complainant in indulging in repeated harassment of the petitioners. The criminal original petitions shall stand closed. Consequently, connected miscellaneous petitions are closed.”
9. The respondent then preferred Special Leave Petition in the Supreme Court being SLP (Crl.) No. 9853 of 2010 against the order dated 8th February, 2010, which was dismissed by this Court on 22nd November, 2010 with liberty to pursue protest petition, if any, said to be pending on the file of the Judicial Magistrate, Kangayem. It is alleged that no protest petition was pending on that day.

10. Though in different context, respondent No.1, K.C. Palanisamy, filed three writ petitions against the State of Tamil Nadu, Superintendent of Police, Economic Offences Wing, Chennai, Director General of Police, State of Tamil Nadu, Union of India, Central Bureau of Investigation and Reserve Bank of India, in which respondent No.1 prayed for issuance of writ of mandamus directing the respondents in writ petitions for investigation as also for transfer of investigation and FIR making allegations against another Company, DAIL. In the said writ petitions, the contention of the writ petitioner was that he was the resident of Coimbatore and former Member of Legislative Assembly of the State of Tamil Nadu and Managing Director of the Company viz. CEPL. The said Company was formed for the purpose of sharing a Joint Venture between the CG Holdings Private Limited, ORE Holdings Limited, Mauritius and one N. Athappan. As part of the Joint Venture business CEPL looked for acquiring a Telecom Company called DAIL which was a Delhi based Company involved in the business of International Long Distance Telephony Services and Internet Services. In those writ petitions, a common counter affidavit was filed by the respondents refuting all the averments made in the three writ petitions and stated that more than nine cases were pending against the respondent No.1, writ petitioner. In the order dated 19th October, 2011 passed by the Madras High Court in those three writ petitions, the numbers of cases pending against the writ petitioner were mentioned in para 19 of the order, extracted hereunder:

“19. The cases pending against the petitioner in various provisions of IPC including Section 420 IPC, there were as many as 9 cases in Coimbatore alone. They are as follows:-
“a) Coimbatore City Crime Branch Cr. No.37/99 u/s. 420 IPC.
           b)    Coimbatore City Crime Branch
                  Cr. No.17/2000 u/s. 420 IPC.


            c)   Coimbatore City Crime Branch
                  Cr. No.62/2000 u/s. 420 IPC.


            d)    Coimbatore City Crime Branch
                  Cr. No.18/2001 u/s. 420 IPC.


            e)    Coimbatore City Crime Branch
                  Cr. No.25/2001 u/s. 420 IPC.


            f)    Coimbatore City Crime Branch
                  Cr. No.29/2001 u/s. 384 IPC.


            g)    Coimbatore City Crime Branch
                  Cr. No.20/2002 u/s. 467, 468,471
                 472 and 477(A), IPC.


            h)    Coimbatore Economic Offences Wing
                  Cr. No.03/2001 u/s. 408 IPC.


            i)    Coimbatore City Crime Branch
                  Cr. No.26/2003 u/s.406 IPC.”




11. In para 20 of the order dated 19th October, 2011, the Court observed that the modus operandi of the writ petitioner was to defraud a person or entity and thereafter approach the Courts with multiple petitions in order to distract attention from his own misdeeds.
12. The High Court dismissing all the afore-mentioned three writ petitions observed as under:-
“28. However, this Court is not inclined to accept the request made by the petitioner. The petitioner is not an innocent party in filing such complaints and he himself has not obeyed the order passed by the Delhi High Court in the application for winding up and asking him to refund the amount siphoned off by him which was obtained as a loan by DAIL. Parties who come to court must come with clean hands. Not only the petitioner has come to this Court with unclean hands, but he himself being an accused in several cases had also suppressed the entire proceedings of the Delhi High Court including the order directing the company to retransfer the money siphoned off from DAIL.
xxx xxx xxx
31. In the present case, the petitioner has filed series of Crl.Ops including the prayer which has been made in the writ petitions and they were negatived by this Court more than once. All that this Court held was that investigation should be conducted by the State Police and a report should be filed expeditiously and that has been done in this case as noted in the counter affidavit filed by the second respondent.
xxx xxx xxx
34. Therefore, in the light of the above, there is no case made out to grant any direction sought for by the petitioner either in the first writ petition or to call for a report from RBI as demanded in the second writ petition or for any direction to the Central Government to take steps to retransfer the funds siphoned off from this country. The petitioner has not made out any prima facie case for grant of any such direction and he has suppressed the information relating to winding up proceedings before the Delhi High Court. The petitioner himself is not a person above board and faced with several criminal cases under Section 420 IPC not only as revealed in the affidavit filed in support of the petition for impleadment but also as noted by this Court in the decision cited in Ramaswamy Athappan’s case (cited supra). The petitioner himself is guilty of several commissions and omissions and at his instance no direction can be granted by this Court.
35. In view of the above, all the three writ petitions will stand dismissed. However, there will be no order as to costs.
Consequently, connected miscellaneous petitions are closed.”

13. Curiously enough, on 2nd January, 2012, respondent No. 6 - Superintendent of Police, Tiruppur allegedly in collusion with respondent No. 1 and relying upon the order dated 22nd November, 2010 reopened FIR No. 7 of 2007 and ordered re-investigation. Charge-sheet being CC 162 of 2012 ultimately came to be filed by respondent No. 5 - Dy. Superintendent of Police, District Crime Records Bureau, Erode before the Judicial Magistrate, Erode-III on 11th September, 2012 inter alia against Paul Rivett, Chandran Rathnaswami, Ramasamy Athappan, Nandakumar Athappan, M/s. Fairfax Financial Holdings Limited, M/s. Hamin Watsa Investment Council, Odyssey America Reinsurance Corporation and ORE Holdings Limited showing them respectively as accused Nos. 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 9, 11 and 12 for committing offences under Sections 120-B, 420, 409 read with 109 IPC.

14. On the basis of aforesaid chargesheet, the Judicial Magistrate on 12th September, 2012 issued summons returnable on 12th October, 2012. On 26th September, 2012, the Dy. Superintendent of Police filed a report stating that he searched for the accused in Chennai and Mumbai but could not ascertain their whereabouts and accordingly prayed for issuance of Non- Bailable Warrants (NBWs) which were issued by the Judicial Magistrate, Erode on 27th September, 2012. Based upon the NBWs, the Superintendent of Police issued a Look-Out Circular on 9th January, 2013 against the appellant. Unaware of all this, the appellant landed in India and was detained by the immigration authorities. He filed a writ petition being W.P. No. 1764 of 2013 and on 22nd January, 2013 the High Court passed an interim order restraining appellant’s detention and directed to post the writ petition on 29th January, 2013. SLP filed against this order was disposed of on 24th January, 2013 observing that the High Court had itself posted the matter on 29th January, 2013. On 29th January, 2013, the High Court directed the appellant to surrender before the trial court and pray for recall of NBWs vide order passed in Criminal O.P. No. 2283 of 2013 filed by him for quashing the chargesheet i.e. CC 162 of 2012. Crl.M.P. No. 3 of 2013 was also filed in Criminal O.P. No. 2283 of 2013 alleging fraud committed by the opposite party. On the same day, Crl.M.Ps. No. 3 in Criminal O.P. No. 2166 of 2013 filed by Ramasamy Athappan & N. Athappan and Criminal O.P. No.2282 of 2013 filed by Paul Rivett also came up before the High Court and they were also directed to surrender before the Judicial Magistrate No. III, Erode. Finally on 1st February, 2013 the High Court directed in respect of the appellant (petitioner in Criminal O.P. No. 2283 of 2013), Ramasamy Athappan & N. Athappan (petitioners in Criminal O.P. No. 2166 of 2013) and Paul Rivett (petitioner in Criminal O.P. No. 2282 of 2013) as under:

“5. Considering the submissions made by all the parties and also considering the facts and circumstances of the case, the order dated 29.01.2013 is modified as follows:
“The petitioners are directed to appear before the trial Court on or before 08.03.2013 and on such appearance, the warrant, if any, shall be recalled. If the offences are non-bailable in nature, the petitioners are directed to file bail application before the trial Court along with a bond for a sum of Rs. 10,000/- (Rupees ten Thousand) with two sureties each for like sum to the satisfaction of the trial court and on such sureties, the trial court shall dispose the bail applications on the same day. The petitioners are at liberty to file to withdraw the lookout application before this Court, if they are advised to do so.
With the above directions, these petitions are disposed of.”
15. The appellant surrendered on 4th February, 2013 and NBWs were recalled by the Judicial Magistrate III, Erode. However, the immigration authorities did not allow the appellant to leave India on 5th February, 2013 stating that the court proceedings were pending. In the meanwhile, writ petition being W.P. No. 2739 of 2013 was filed by Ramaswamy Athappan praying to issue a writ of mandamus or any other writ, order or direction in the nature of a writ of mandamus forebearing the Superintendent of Police, Tiruppur (Tamilnadu) and Ministry of Home Affairs, New Delhi including its constituent officers at all airports from acting upon the non- bailable arrest warrant dated 27th September, 2012 issued against the petitioner (Ramaswamy Athappan) in respect of chargesheet CC No. 162 of 2012 pending on the file of Judicial Magistrate-III, Erode and the alleged Look Out Notice dated 9th January, 2013 issued by the Superintendent of Police and consequently from in any manner restraining/restricting the petitioner’s entry into or exit out of India. Similar writ petition being W.P. No. 2740 of 2013 was also filed by the appellant – Chandran Ratnaswami who additionally prayed for directions to DSP, SP, MHA and respondent No. 1 herein K.C. Palanisamy to jointly and severally pay compensation of Rs. 10 crores to him for his illegal detention on 22nd January, 2013.

16. On 26th February, 2013, the High Court again directed the appellant to appear before the trial court by passing the following order in W.P. Nos. 2739 & 2740 of 2013 and Criminal O.P. Nos. 2166, 2282 and 2283 of 2013:

“10. Accordingly, Mr. Chandran Ratnaswami the accused should appear before the learned Judicial Magistrate, where CC No. 162/2012 is pending, within a period of two weeks from today to comply with the following:
(i) he must file an affidavit of undertaking before the court that he would not evade the due process of law and ensure his appearance as and when required;
(ii) he should execute his own bond for a sum of Rs.5,00,000/- (Rupees Five Lakhs only) and two cash sureties of Rs.5,00,000/- (Rupees Five Lakhs only) each to the satisfaction of the learned Judicial Magistrate-III, Erode on the same day.
xxx xxx xxx
13. In this case, non-bailable warrant has been recalled on 04.02.2013 on the accused surrendering before the learned Magistrate.
For non-compliance of the orders passed by this Court, I am inclined to pass the above order directing them to appear before the Court for the purpose of filing an affidavit and furnishing surety.”

17. On 11th March, 2013, this Court granted stay of chargesheet i.e. CC 162 of 2012 by an order passed in SLP(Crl.) Nos. 1947-1948 of 2013 which have been filed by Paul Rivett, an other accused in the chargesheet CC 162 of 2012, challenging the orders dated 29th January and 1st February, 2013 respectively in Criminal O.P. No. 2282 of 2013 and Crl.M.P. No.3 of 2013 in Criminal O.P. No. 2282 of 2013. Paul Rivett is Law Officer in the Fairfax Group and is a Canadian citizen and he has also been made an accused in the chargesheet CC 162 of 2012. NBWs as well as the Look Out Notice were issued against Paul Rivett also.

18. On 12th March, 2013, the appellant prayed before the Single Judge of High Court that he may be permitted to file affidavit of undertaking there as proceedings in the trial court were stayed by this Court which prayer was opposed by respondent No. 1 on 13th March, 2013 urging that this Court was seized of the matter and the Single Judge could not pass any order. However, the Single Judge passed an order dated 14th March, 2013 in M.P. No. 2 of 2013 in W.P. No. 2740 of 2013 filed by the appellant seeking recall of the Look Out Notice and directed the appellant to file the affidavit of undertaking before the High Court and to furnish security deposit of Rs. 25 lakhs and permitted him to travel.

19. Challenging the above order of the Single Judge, respondent No. 1 filed a writ appeal being W.A. No. 517 of 2013 which was allowed by a Division Bench of the High Court vide order dated 22nd March, 2013 setting aside the order dated 14th March, 2013 passed by the Single Judge and observing:

“12. From the above narrated facts it is evident that the first respondent has not filed bail application while surrendering himself before the Judicial Magistrate No.III, Erode, for recalling the Non- bailable Warrant and the fact remains, till date he has not obtained any order of anticipatory bail/bail.
13. The appellant challenged the interim order dated 26.2.2013 passed in Crl. O.P. No.2166, 2282 and 2283 of 2013 before the Hon’ble Supreme Court in SLP (C ) Nos. 1924-1926 of 2013. Accused No.2 in the said C.C. No.162 of 2012 viz. Paul Rivert filed SLP (Crl) No.1947-1948 of 2013 and prayed to quash the proceedings pending before the Judicial Magistrate Court No.III, Erode and also prayed for an interim order to dispense with hi9s personal appearance before the Judicial Magistrate Court No.III, Erode in connection with C.C. No.162 of 2012.
The Hon’ble Supreme Court refused to pass any interim order in the applications filed by the appellant herein.

14. Insofar as the applications filed by Paul Rivert (A-2), the Hon’ble Supreme Court refused to stay the order passed by this Court dated 29.01.2013 and 01.02.2013 in Crl. O.P. 2282 of 2013 and granted stay of the proceedings in CC 162 of 2013 pending on the file of Judicial Magistrate Court No.III, Erode, pending further orders. The prayer for dispensing with his appearance was not granted. The appellant thereafter filed Crl. M.P. Nos.5810 to 5812 of 2013 in SLP (Crl.) No.1924-1926 of 2013 and prayed for restraining the first respondent from leaving India, pending SLP direct the first respondent to surrender his passport before the Judicial Magistrate Court No.III, Erode No order was passed in the said petition and the matter is adjourned to 3.4.2013 before the Supreme Court for further hearing.

15. The first respondent thereafter moved this High Court to pass orders in M.P. No.2 of 2013 which was allowed by the leaned single Judge holding that since CC No.162 of 2012 is stayed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court and the NBW having been recalled, the basis of the Lookout Notice has gone.” xxx xxx xxx

18. On a perusal of the prayer made in the writ petition, it is evident that the first respondent has challenged the Look-out Notice issued on 9.1.2013 and consequently prayed for payment of compensation. The learned Single Judge in the above miscellaneous petition has held that the Loo-out Notice dated 9.1.2013 is cancelled and allowed the first respondent to leave India after filing undertaking affidavit and deposit a sum of Rs. 25 lakhs.

19. It is not in dispute that the very same issues regarding the Look out Notice and the prayer to quash CC No.162 of 2012 pending on the file of JM III Court, Erode, which was filed at the instance of another accused (A-2 Paul Rivert) are posted for hearing before the Hon’ble Supreme Court on 3.4.2013. Admittedly the matter is seized of by the Hon’ble Supreme Court and only on interim stay of the proceedings in CC No.162 of 2012 was ordered by the Apex Court, that too at the instance of A-2 in the above C.C. No. 162 of 2013, and the prayer to dispense with the appearance of A-2 was not granted. If the order of the learned single Judge dated 14.3.2013 is to be implemented immediately, it may be difficult to secure the presence of the first respondent in the criminal case.

xxx xxx xxx

22. On the above said background and in the light of the decision cited supra, we are of the considered view that the order passed by the learned single Judge in M.P. No.2 of 2013 in W.P. No.2740 of 2013 dated 14.3.2013 is liable to be set aside, and accordingly set aside. The writ appeal is allowed. Consequently, the first respondent is entitled to get refund of the amount deposited by him on 15.3.2013 pursuant to the interim order of the learned single Judge No costs. Connect M.P. No.1 of 2013 is closed.”

20. Hence, this appeal arising out of SLP(C) No. 13120 of 2013 by the appellant – Chandran Ratnaswami. S.L.P.(Crl.) Nos. 3273-3274 of 2013 have also been filed by the same appellant (an accused in Chargesheet CC 162 of 2013) against orders dated 29th January, 2013 and 1st February, 2013 respectively in Criminal O.P. No. 2283 of 2013 and Crl.M.P. No.3 of 2013 in Criminal O.P. No. 2283 of 2013. In these SLPs, notice has not been issued and they are fresh ones.

21. Criminal Appeals arising out of S.L.P.(Crl.) Nos. 1924-1927 of 2013 have been filed by K.C. Palanisamy [respondent No. 1 in civil appeal arising out of SLP(C) No. 13120 of 2013] challenging the order dated 26th February, 2013 in Criminal O.P. Nos. 2283, 2282 and 2166 of 2013 and Civil Appeals arising out of S.L.P.(C) Nos. 11342-11343 of 2013 (D.No.7366/2013) have been filed challenging the order dated 26th February, 2013 in Writ Petition Nos. 2739 and 2740 of 2013. In these matters, the appellant – K.C. Palanisamy has challenged the said High Court’s order by which the accused have been exempted from filing proper bail application under the Criminal Procedure Code.

22. Contempt Petition (C) No. 166 of 2013 in S.L.P.(Crl.) No. 9853 of 2010 has been filed by the applicant – Chandran Ratnaswami for wilful and deliberate violation and disobedience of order dated 22nd November, 2010 by re-opening the closed FIR No. 7 of 2007. In this contempt petition, notice has not been issued and it is a fresh one.

23. Mr. K.K. Venugopal, learned senior counsel appearing in SLP(C) No.13120 of 2013 assailed the impugned order passed by the Division Bench and also the orders passed in criminal proceedings as being illegal and wholly without jurisdiction. Learned counsel drew our attention to the entire facts of the case discussed hereinabove and submitted that respondent No.1 filed a series of complaints which have either been dismissed or quashed or stayed by the High Court or this Court. Learned counsel submitted that the criminal courts including the High Court have completely failed and erred in not condemning respondent No.1 for approaching the courts to obstruct the proceedings before the learned Single Judge of the Madras High Court. Learned counsel submitted that the disputes arose with regard to the Joint Venture Agreement between the parties have been finally adjudicated by the Company Law Board and the High Court, but respondent No.1 instead of complying with the directions of the Company Law Board and High Court started filing frivolous criminal cases against the appellant, which were either quashed or stayed by the High Court. Learned counsel seriously assailed the conduct of the Superintendent of Police, who directed reinvestigation in a matter which was finally closed. Learned counsel submitted that the Division Bench failed to note that the entire efforts of the respondent in prosecuting the appellant are serious abuse of the process of the Court. Learned counsel referred the allegations made in the complaint petition and submitted that the whole object of filing those complaints are nothing but to pressurize the appellant and to harass him. Learned counsel then submitted that the whole procedure in the proceedings initiated against the appellant is violative of Article 21 of the Constitution of India. It was contended that the conduct of respondent No.1 is deplorable and the same is contemptuous amounting to deliberate obstruction of the judicial proceedings and an abuse of the process of the Court. Learned counsel lastly contended that the Division Bench has erroneously set aside the order of the learned Single Judge on the ground that the issue was pending in this Court.

24. Mr. Mukul Rohatgi, learned senior counsel appearing in SLP(Crl.) Nos.1947-48 of 2013 after narrating the entire facts in the case and the sequence of events submitted that the continuation of criminal proceedings and the submission of the charge-sheet is the result of the wrong understanding of the order by Superintendent of Police, Tiruppur, who directed reinvestigation in a matter which was closed. Learned counsel, therefore, submitted that the order for reinvestigation passed by the Superintendent of Police is totally illegal, void and contemptuous. It was contended that series of complaints filed by respondent No.1 has either been dismissed or quashed or stayed by the High Court and that respondent No.1 has the propensity to abuse the legal process and utilize it as a tool to wreak vengeance against others involved with the CEPL so that the appellants’ Company does not pursue the Company Law Board proceedings. Learned counsel submitted that it has been the modus operandi of respondent No.1 to file false and bogus complaints and utilize the same to harass and coerce the appellant. Lastly, learned counsel submitted that the dispute raised by the respondent is purely a civil dispute but it has been given the colour of criminal act with the sole objective to implicate and detain these two appellants, who are foreigners, in criminal cases and not to allow them to travel outside India.

25. Mr. C.A. Sundaram, learned senior counsel appearing for one of the appellants contended that it is a matter of record that every single complaint filed by respondent No. 1 has been either dismissed or quashed or stayed by the High Court or this Court and respondent No. 1 has the propensity to abuse the legal process and utilize it as a tool to wreak vengeance against others involved with CEPL so that the appellant’s company does not pursue the Company Law Board proceedings. Learned counsel contended that it has been the modus operandi of respondent No. 1 to file false and bogus criminal complaints and to utilize the same to harass and coerce the appellant. Respondent No. 1 had malafidely filed a complaint CC 157/07 before the Judicial Magistrate, Perundurai. This was an ingenious case where respondent No. 1 deliberately and fraudulently signed and issued a cheque from the CEPL account to his own company, namely, Cherraan Constructions Limited (CCL) for Rs. 5 crore (when there was no transaction, liability to the payee or authority to issue the cheque) and then caused the cheque to be dishonoured. Promptly, CCL filed a Section 138 NI Act complaint against the appellant and the other Director of CEPL etc. but did not make respondent No. 1 an accused. The Madras High Court quashed this complaint in Criminal O.P. No. 29737 of 2007.

26. Mr. Karthik Sheshadri, learned counsel appearing for the respondent, on the other hand in support of continuance of criminal proceedings, submitted that the respondent - complainant made out a case in the complaint for prosecuting the appellant for cheating and misappropriation of money. With regard to the filing of FIR being No.7 of 2007, learned counsel submitted that immediately after the FIR was lodged, the appellants approached the High Court of Madras and got an order of stay for further investigation in Criminal O.P. No. 12695/2007 and Criminal O.P. No.19384 of 2007 and consequently all further investigation of the crime alleged came to be stayed. Appellants also filed a case for quashing of the FIR before the Madras High Court. Learned counsel vehemently argued that FIR No.7/2007 was never closed at any point of time and, therefore, the direction for the reinvestigation was perfectly justified. Based on the investigation, charge-sheet was filed. According to the learned counsel, the Superintendent of Police passed order for the reinvestigation only because no investigation was ever conducted because of the stay granted by the High Court. While justifying the legality and validity of reinvestigation, learned counsel submitted that even without permission of the Magistrate, Police Officer can direct further investigation. In support of that, learned counsel relied upon the decision of this Court in State of Bihar & Another vs. J.A.C. Saldanna and Others, AIR 1980 SC 326. Lastly, learned counsel submitted that when the charge-sheet makes out a case then civil liberty is not the appropriate remedy for the aggrieved person.

27. In the light of factual situation and having gone through the entire facts and the sequence of events in the criminal proceedings before the criminal courts and the orders passed time to time by such courts, the question that falls for consideration is as to whether continuance of such criminal proceedings is an abuse of the process of the Court.

28. Before we embark upon dealing with the issue posed before us, we would like to discuss the principles laid down by various courts as to when continuance of criminal proceeding will amount to abuse of process of the Court.

29. The doctrine of abuse of process of court and the remedy of refusal to allow the trial to proceed is well-established and recognized doctrine both by the English courts and courts in India. There are some established principles of law which bar the trial when there appears to be abuse of process of court. Lord Morris in the case of Connelly vs. Director of Public Prosecutions, (1964) 2 All ER 401 (HL) observed: “There can be no doubt that a court which is endowed with a particular jurisdiction has powers which are necessary to enable it to act effectively within such jurisdiction. A court must enjoy such powers in order to enforce its rule of practice and to suppress any abuse of its process and to defeat any attempted thwarting of its process”. “The power (which is inherent in a court’s jurisdiction) to prevent abuse of its process and to control its own procedure must in a criminal court include a power to safeguard an accused person from oppression or prejudice.” In his separate pronouncement, Lord Delvin in the same case observed that where particular criminal proceedings constitute an abuse of process, the court is empowered to refuse to allow the indictment to proceed to trial.

30. In Hui Chi-Ming vs. The Queen [(1992) 1 AC 34 (PC)], the Privy Council defined the word “abuse of process” as something so unfair and wrong with the prosecution that the court should not allow a prosecutor to proceed with what is, in all other respects, a perfectly supportable case.

31. In the leading case of Bennett vs. Horseferry Road Magistrates’ Court, (1993) 3 All ER 138, on the application of abuse of process, the court confirms that an abuse of process justifying the stay of prosecution could arise in the following circumstances:

(i) where it would be impossible to give the accused a fair trial; or
(ii) where it would amount to misuse/manipulation of process because it offends the court’s sense of justice and propriety to be asked to try the accused in the circumstances of the particular case.
32. In R. vs. Derby Crown Court ex p Brooks, (1985) 80 Cr.App.R. 164, Lord Chief Justice Ormrod stated: “It may be an abuse of process if either

(a) the prosecution has manipulated or misused the process of the court so as to deprive the defendant of a protection provided by law or to take unfair advantage of a technicality, or (b) on the balance of probability the defendant has been, or will be, prejudiced in the preparation of conduct of his defence by delay on the part of the prosecution which is unjustifiable.”

33. Lord Justice Neill in R. vs. Beckford, [1996] 1 Cr.App.R. 94: [1995] R.T.R. 251 observed that: “The jurisdiction to stay can be exercised in many different circumstances. Nevertheless two main strands can be detected in the authorities: (a) cases where the court concludes that the defendant cannot receive a fair trial; (b) cases where the court concludes that it would be unfair for the defendant to be tried.” What is unfair and wrong will be for the court to determine on the individual facts of each case.

34. This Court in State of Karnataka vs. L. Muniswamy and Others, (1977) 2 SCC 699 observed that the wholesome power under Section 482 Cr.P.C. entitles the High Court to quash a proceeding when it comes to the conclusion that allowing the proceeding to continue would be an abuse of the process of the Court or that the ends of justice require that the proceeding ought to be quashed. The High Courts have been invested with inherent powers, both in civil and criminal matters, to achieve a salutary public purpose. A court proceeding ought not to be permitted to degenerate into a weapon of harassment or persecution. The Court observed in this case that ends of justice are higher than the ends of mere law though justice must be administered according to laws made by the legislature. It was held in this case (at p.703 of SCC):

“7. …..
In the exercise of this wholesome power, the High Court is entitled to quash a proceeding if it comes to the conclusion that allowing the proceeding to continue would be an abuse of the process of the Court or that the ends of justice require that the proceeding ought to be quashed. The saving of the High Court's inherent powers, both in civil and criminal matters, is designed to achieve a salutary public purpose which is that a court proceeding ought not to be permitted to degenerate into a weapon of harassment or persecution. In a criminal case, the veiled object behind a lame prosecution, the very nature of the material on which the structure of the prosecution rests and the like would justify the High Court in quashing the proceeding in the interest of justice. The ends of justice are higher than the ends of mere law though justice has got to be administered according to laws made by the legislature. The compelling necessity for making these observations is that without a proper realisation of the object and purpose of the provision which seeks to save the inherent powers of the High Court to do justice, between the State and its subjects, it would be impossible to appreciate the width and contours of that salient jurisdiction.” This case has been followed in a large number of subsequent cases of this Court and other courts.
35. In State of Haryana and Others vs. Bhajan Lal and Others, 1992 Supp.(1) SCC 335, this Court in the backdrop of interpretation of various relevant provisions of Cr.P.C. under Chapter XIV and of the principles of law enunciated by this Court in a series of decisions relating to the exercise of the extraordinary power under Article 226 of the Constitution of India or the inherent powers under Section 482 Cr.P.C. gave the following categories of cases by way of illustration wherein such power could be exercised either to prevent abuse of the process of the court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice. Thus, this Court made it clear that it may not be possible to lay down any precise, clearly defined and sufficiently channelised and inflexible guidelines or rigid formulae and to give an exhaustive list to myriad kinds of cases wherein such power should be exercised: (SCC pp. 378-79, para 102) “102. (1) ……… (2) …..
(3) …… (4) …..

(5) …..

(6)…..

(7) Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended with mala fide and/or where the proceeding is maliciously instituted with an ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance on the accused and with a view to spite him due to private and personal grudge.”

36. This Court in Zandu Pharmaceutical Works Ltd. and Others vs. Mohd. Sharaful Haque and Another, (2005) 1 SCC 122 observed thus: (SCC p. 128, para 8) “8. … It would be an abuse of process of the court to allow any action which would result in injustice and prevent promotion of justice. In exercise of the powers, court would be justified to quash any proceeding if it finds that initiation/continuance of it amounts to abuse of the process of court or quashing of these proceedings would otherwise serve the ends of justice. When no offence is disclosed by the complaint, the court may examine the question of fact. When a complaint is sought to be quashed, it is permissible to look into the materials to assess what the complainant has alleged and whether any offence is made out even if the allegations are accepted in toto.”

37. In Indian Oil Corpn. v. NEPC India Ltd. and Others, (2006) 6 SCC 736 this Court again cautioned about a growing tendency in business circles to convert purely civil disputes into criminal cases. The Court noticed the prevalent impression that civil law remedies are time consuming and do not adequately protect the interests of lenders/creditors. The Court further observed that: (SCC p. 749, para 13) “13. … Any effort to settle civil disputes and claims, which do not involve any criminal offence, by applying pressure through criminal prosecution should be deprecated and discouraged.”

38. In the case of Inder Mohan Goswami and Another vs. State of Uttaranchal and Others, (2007) 12 SCC 1, this Court after considering series of decisions observed:

“46. The court must ensure that criminal prosecution is not used as an instrument of harassment or for seeking private vendetta or with an ulterior motive to pressurise the accused. On analysis of the aforementioned cases, we are of the opinion that it is neither possible nor desirable to lay down an inflexible rule that would govern the exercise of inherent jurisdiction. Inherent jurisdiction of the High Courts under Section 482 CrPC though wide has to be exercised sparingly, carefully and with caution and only when it is justified by the tests specifically laid down in the statute itself and in the aforementioned cases. In view of the settled legal position, the impugned judgment cannot be sustained.
xxx xxx xxx
50. Civilised countries have recognised that liberty is the most precious of all the human rights. The American Declaration of Independence, 1776, French Declaration of the Rights of Men and the Citizen, 1789, Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the International Covenant of Civil and Political Rights, 1966 all speak with one voice—liberty is the natural and inalienable right of every human being. Similarly, Article 21 of our Constitution proclaims that no one shall be deprived of his liberty except in accordance with procedure prescribed by law.
51. The issuance of non-bailable warrants involves interference with personal liberty. Arrest and imprisonment means deprivation of the most precious right of an individual. Therefore, the courts have to be extremely careful before issuing non-bailable warrants.
52. Just as liberty is precious for an individual so is the interest of the society in maintaining law and order. Both are extremely important for the survival of a civilised society. Sometimes in the larger interest of the public and the State it becomes absolutely imperative to curtail freedom of an individual for a certain period, only then the non-bailable warrants should be issued.”
39. In G. Sagar Suri and Another vs. State of U.P. and Others, (2000) 2 SCC 636, this Court observed that it is the duty and obligation of the criminal court to exercise a great deal of caution in issuing the process, particularly when matters are essentially of civil nature.

40. In the case of S.N. Sharma vs. Bipen Kumar Tiwari and Others, AIR 1970 SC 786 (at p.789), this Court has stated thus:

“7. ….. It appears to us that, though the Code of Criminal Procedure gives to the police unfettered power to investigate all cases where they suspect that a cognizable offence has been committed, in appropriate cases an aggrieved person can always seek a remedy by invoking the power of the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution under which, if the High Court could be convinced that the power of investigation has been exercised by a police officer mala fide, the High Court can always issue a writ of mandamus restraining the police officer from misusing his legal powers. The fact that the Code does not contain any other provision giving power to a Magistrate to stop investigation by the police cannot be a ground for holding that such a power must be read in Section 159 of the Code.”
41. In the case of State of West Bengal and Others vs. Swapan Kumar Guha and Others, AIR 1982 SC 949 while examining the power of a police officer in the field of investigation of a cognizable offence, Chandrachud, C.J. has affirmed the view expressed by Mathew, J. and observed as follows: (at p.958 of AIR) “22. …. There is no such thing like unfettered discretion in the realm of powers defined by statutes and indeed, unlimited discretion in that sphere can become a ruthless destroyer of personal freedom. The power to investigate into cognizable offences must, therefore, be exercised strictly on the condition on which it is granted by the Code. ….”

42. In the case of Uma Shankar Gopalika vs. State of Bihar and Another, (2005) 10 SCC 336, this Court has held as under:

“6. Now the question to be examined by us is as to whether on the facts disclosed in the petition of complaint any criminal offence whatsoever is made out much less offences under Sections 420/120-B IPC. The only allegation in the complaint petition against the accused persons is that they assured the complainant that when they receive the insurance claim amounting to Rs 4,20,000, they would pay a sum of Rs 2,60,000 to the complainant out of that but the same has never been paid. Apart from that there is no other allegation in the petition of complaint. It was pointed out on behalf of the complainant that the accused fraudulently persuaded the complainant to agree so that the accused persons may take steps for moving the Consumer Forum in relation to the claim of Rs 4,20,000. It is well settled that every breach of contract would not give rise to an offence of cheating and only in those cases breach of contract would amount to cheating where there was any deception played at the very inception. If the intention to cheat has developed later on, the same cannot amount to cheating. In the present case it has nowhere been stated that at the very inception there was any intention on behalf of the accused persons to cheat which is a condition precedent for an offence under Section 420 IPC.
7. In our view petition of complaint does not disclose any criminal offence at all much less any offence either under Section 420 or Section 120-B IPC and the present case is a case of purely civil dispute between the parties for which remedy lies before a civil court by filing a properly constituted suit. In our opinion, in view of these facts allowing the police investigation to continue would amount to an abuse of the process of court and to prevent the same it was just and expedient for the High Court to quash the same by exercising the powers under Section 482 CrPC which it has erroneously refused.”
43. Coming back to the instant case from the affidavits filed by the parties, the facts which come into light are that the appellant-Chandran Ratnaswami settled in Canada since 1974. He is holding executive posts in various companies based in Canada and has made investment in India worth more than 1 billion USD. He is also a Director on the Board of various renowned companies including ORE Holdings Limited based in Mauritius. The said company ORE entered into a Joint Venture Agreement (JVA) with C.G. Holdings Private Limited (respondent No.1 – K.C. Palanisamy’s Company) and N. Athappan for constructing and developing a hotel property, shopping complex etc. owned by Cherraan Properties Limited (CPL) and Vasantha Mills Limited (VML). ORE invested Rs.75 crores and got 45% in Cheran Enterprises Private Limited (CEPL). Athappan invested Rs. 4 crores and got 10%.

44. Disputes arose between the parties when respondent No.1 alleged to have transferred shares of CPL and VML to CEPL instead of bringing money and got 45% shareholdings in CEPL. Respondent No.1 allegedly swindled the said 75 crores deposited by the appellant Company ORE and transferred the immovable assets of CPL and VML, subsidiaries of CEPL.

Consequently, ORE filed Company Petition before the Company Law Board on account of alleged acts of oppression and mismanagement indulged by respondent No.1. The matter before the Company Law Board was hotly contested and finally the Company Law Board by order dated 13th August, 2008 directed respondent No.1, CG Holdings and CEPL to return the investment of appellant Company ORE and Athappan with 8% interest. On payment of money it was directed that respondent K.C. Palanisamy will take control of CEPL and its subsidiaries. Clarification Petition was also disposed of by Company Law Board on 13th August, 2008.

45. Both the parties moved the Madras High Court by filing appeals and those Company Appeals were finally disposed of on 5th August, 2011 and the order passed by the Company Law Board was confirmed.

The Division Bench of the Madras High Court while confirming the view taken by the Company Law Board held that both parties cannot jointly run the business and, therefore, to ensure smooth exit of ORE and Athappan, the Company Law Board passed the order. The said order of the Division Bench passed in appeals, however, was not challenged by respondent No.1 K.C. Palanisamy.

46. The appellant filed execution case, which is pending. It further appears that a suit was also filed being O.S.No.90 of 2007 before the District Munsiff Court.

47. Instead of complying with the order of the Company Law Board and the directions and observations made by the Madras High Court in the aforementioned Company Appeals, respondent No.1 started filing several criminal complaints against the appellant. The first complaint was filed by the respondent before the Economic Offences Wing, Chennai, alleging that ORE invested only Rs. 75 crores and for not bringing Rs. 300 crores in Joint Venture Company. The petition filed in the High Court seeking direction to EOW to take action on the complaint was, however, withdrawn. Respondent No.1 then filed a second complaint before the Judicial Magistrate, Perundurai which was dismissed after examining respondent No.1 and his two witnesses. The respondent then filed another complaint before the Judicial Magistrate, Kangeyam without disclosing the dismissal of the earlier complaint filed before the Judicial Magistrate, Perundurai. The said complaint finally came to be registered as FIR No.7 of 2007. The appellant moved the High Court for quashing the said FIR. In the said petition, the High Court, after noticing the similar complaint filed earlier by respondent No.1 in the court of Judicial Magistrate, Perundurai, finally observed that the second criminal proceeding initiated by respondent No.1 has no merit. The court further passed a stringent remark against the conduct of respondent No.1 for filing cases on the same issue.

48. Respondent No.1 then moved this Court by filing SLP(Crl.) No.9853 of 2010 alleging the pendency of the protest petition and non-closure of the criminal case. This Court refused to interfere with the order but observed that if any protest petition is pending the same shall be disposed of in accordance with law.

49. Curiously enough, on the report of Superintendent of Police, Tiruppur, the criminal case in FIR No.7 of 2007 was directed to be reopened for re-investigation. On this FIR, the Magistrate before whom the criminal case was pending passed various orders which were time to time challenged by the aggrieved party before the High Court and before this Court. Simultaneously, the appellant also filed counter criminal cases against the respondent which were also proceeded and are pending in those criminal courts.

50. In a nutshell, the dispute arising out of Joint Venture Agreement has been fully and finally settled by the Company Law Board and also the High Court and several directions were issued for compliance including the return of the amount by respondent No.1 to the appellant and to become the sole owner of those companies.

51. It is pertinent to mention here that in course of arguments the action of Superintendent of Police was challenged by the learned counsel appearing for the appellant. In order to justify the action of the Superintendent of Police in directing the investigation, Mr. P.S. Narsimhan, learned senior counsel submitted that on the instruction of Inspector General of Police such reinvestigation was directed by the Superintendent of Police. However, no such letter of instruction has been produced before us by the learned counsel. At this juncture, we reiterate that the power of Police Officers in the field of investigation of a cognizable offence is not unlimited. Hence, the power during the investigation must be exercised strictly within the limitation prescribed in the Code of Criminal Procedure and such power may not result in destroying the personal freedom of a citizen.

52. As noticed above, after the dispute was finally settled by the Company Law Board and the Madras High Court in appeal, the respondent approached the Economic Offences Wing, who refused to entertain the complaint. The respondent then moved the complaint before the Judicial Magistrate, Perundurai for initiating criminal action against the appellant for breach of contract, which was dismissed by the Magistrate holding the same as nothing but to take vengeance. The Magistrate further held that if the conditions of the agreement are violated the respondent has to seek remedy under the Contract Act or the Company Law instead of filing criminal case. Suppressing the said complaint and the order passed by the Magistrate, the respondent tried again by filing a complaint before the Judicial Magistrate, Kangayam for initiating criminal action against the appellants for the breach of contract and conspiracy. Although the FIR was registered, but a closure report as a mistake of fact was prepared. The High Court while passing the order observed that the Court would frown upon the conduct of the complainant in indulging in repeated harassment of the petitioners-appellants. Irrespective of the dispute with regard to the closure of the case, a fresh life was given to the criminal case at the instance of Superintendent of Police, who directed re-investigation and in course of the said criminal proceeding irrespective of FIR No.7/2007 the appellants were harassed and on technicalities various orders for surrender, arrest and their detention had been passed. As noticed above, in the three writ petitions filed by respondent No.1, though not against the appellant but against the C.B.I. in respect of different transactions, the High Court dismissing all those writ petitions observed that the modus operandi of the writ petitioner (respondent No.1) was to defraud the person or entity and thereafter approach the Courts with multiple proceedings in order to distract attention from his own misdeeds.

53. Neither the High Court nor the Magisterial Court have ever applied their mind and considered the conduct of the respondent and continuance of criminal proceedings in respect of the disputes, which are civil in nature and finally adjudicated by the competent authority i.e. the Company Law Board and the High Court in appeal.

54. We are of the definite opinion that the complainant has manipulated and misused the process of Court so as to deprive the appellants from their basic right to move free anywhere inside or outside the country. Moreover, it would be unfair if the appellants are to be tried in such criminal proceedings arising out of alleged breach of a Joint Venture Agreement specially when such disputes have been finally resolved by the Court of competent jurisdiction. Hence, allowing the criminal proceedings arising out of FIR No.7 of 2007 to continue would be an abuse of the process of the Court and, therefore, for the ends of justice such proceedings ought to be quashed. Since the High Court failed to look into this aspect of the matter while passing the impugned order, in our opinion, the same could not be sustained in law.

55. For the reasons aforesaid, the appeals arising out of SLP (C) No.13120 of 2013, SLP (Crl.) Nos.3273-3274 of 2013 and SLP (Crl.) Nos.1947- 1948 of 2013 are allowed, whereas the appeals arising out of SLP (Crl.) Nos.1924-1926 of 2013 and SLP (C) Nos.11342-11343 of 2013 are dismissed. There shall be no order as to costs.

56. Although we do not appreciate the action of a senior Superintendent of Police, but in view of the order passed in these appeals, we do not want to proceed any further in Contempt Petition (C) No.166 of 2013, which stands disposed of.

……………………………..J. (P. Sathasivam) ……………………………..J. (M.Y. Eqbal) New Delhi, May 09, 2013.

ITEM NO. IE                  COURT NO.2            SECTION XII
(FOR JUDGMENT)

                  S U P R E M E   C O U R T   O F   I N D I A
                              RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS


   CIVIL APPEAL NO.4540 OF 2013 @
PETITION FOR SPECIAL LEAVE TO APPEAL (CIVIL) NO.13120/2013 |CHANDRAN RATNASWAMI |.. |Appellant(s) | | | Versus | | |K.C. PALANISAMY & ORS |.. |Respondent(s) | WITH CRIMINAL APPEAL NOs.736-737 OF 2013 @ SLP(CRL.)NOs. 3273-3274/2013 CRIMINAL APPEAL NOs.731-733 OF 2013 @ SLP(CRL.)NOs.1924-1926/2013 CIVIL APPEAL NO.4537-4538 OF 2013 @ SLP(C)NOs.11342-11343/2013 CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.734-735 OF 2013 @ SLP(CRL.)NOs.1947-1948/2013 CONTEMPT PETITION(CIVIL) NO.. 166/2013 IN SLP(CRL.)NO.9853 OF 2010 DATE : 09/05/2013 These matters were called on for pronouncement of judgment today.

   For Appellant(s)          Mr. E.C. Agrawala,Adv.


   For Respondent(s)   M/s. Mahalakshmi Balaji & Co.


                             Mr. Subramonium Prasad,AAG
                             Mr. M.Yogesh Kanna,Adv.
                             Mr. A.Santha Kumaran,Adv.
                             Ms. Sasi Kala,Adv.


                             Mr. Senthil Jagadessan,Adv.


                           ---                                ...2/-









Hon'ble Mr. Justice M.Y. Eqbal pronounced the judgment of the Bench comprising Hon'ble Mr. Justice P. Sathasivam and His Lordship.

Leave granted.

The appeals arising out of SLP (C) No.13120 of 2013, SLP (Crl.) Nos.3273-3274 of 2013 and SLP (Crl.) Nos.1947-1948 of 2013 are allowed, whereas the appeals arising out of SLP (Crl.) Nos.1924-1926 of 2013 and SLP (C) Nos.11342-11343 of 2013 are dismissed. There shall be no order as to costs.

Although we do not appreciate the action of a senior Superintendent of Police, but in view of the order passed in these appeals, we do not want to proceed any further in Contempt Petition (C) No.166 of 2013, which stands disposed of.

         |    [ Madhu Bala ]                    | |  [ Savita Sainani ]                |
|Sr.PA                                 | |Court Master                        |




[ Signed reportable judgment is placed on the file ]

-----------------------
================================================================================



################################################################################
                        CATEGORY 2: IPC 302 - MURDER
                              (5 CASES)
################################################################################

================================================================================
CASE 6:[Cites 23, Cited by 995]
Supreme Court of India
Khujji @ Surendra Tiwari vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 16 July, 1991
Equivalent citations: 1991 AIR 1853, 1991 SCR (3) 1, AIR 1991 SUPREME COURT 1853, 1991 (3) SCC 627, 1991 AIR SCW 2038, (1992) 1 CURCRIR 161, 1991 CRILR(SC MAH GUJ) 605, (1991) 3 SCR 1 (SC), 1992 CHANDLR(CIV&CRI) 519, (1991) 3 CRIMES 82, (1991) IJR 415 (SC), (1992) SC CR R 36, 1991 SCC (CRI) 916, (1991) 3 JT 151 (SC)
Author: A.M. Ahmadi
Bench: A.M. Ahmadi, K. Ramaswamy
           PETITIONER:
KHUJJI @ SURENDRA TIWARI

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
THE STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH

DATE OF JUDGMENT16/07/1991

BENCH:
AHMADI, A.M. (J)
BENCH:
AHMADI, A.M. (J)
RAMASWAMI, V. (J) II
RAMASWAMY, K.

CITATION:
 1991 AIR 1853		  1991 SCR  (3)	  1
 1991 SCC  (3) 627	  JT 1991 (3)	151
 1991 SCALE  (2)80


ACT:
		  Evidence  Act,1872. Hostile witness-	evi-
dence  of--Whether  to	be treated as  wholly  effaced	from
record or could be accepted to the extent dependable--Prose-
cution witness expressing doubt in crossexamination  regard-
ing  indentity of some of the asssailants--Whether  evidence
in examination-in-chief acceptable--Presence of same set  of
Panch witnesses for all discoveries and attachments--Whether
permissible-Evidence  of interested party--Whether could  be
overlooked.
    Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 : Section 174---Object and
scope  of--Inquest report--Whether should contain  names  of
witnesses.
    Section 386(1)(b)--Evidence of witnesses--Reappraisal by
appellate court--Whether permissible.
    Indian   Penal   Code,  1860:  Sections  302,   34	 and
149--Offence of murder--Several persons charged--All accused
except	 one   acquitted-No   appeal   by   State    against
acquittal--Whether appellate court can reappreciate evidence
to  determine  persons	committing the	offence	 and  record
conviction notwithstanding acquittal of co-accused.
    Practice  and Procedure Per incuriam--Omission to  refer
decision of larger Bench in the Court's decision--Effect of.



HEADNOTE:
    The	 appellant was convicted by the courts	below  under
Section	 302 IPC and sentenced to life imprisonment for	 the
murder	of one G. It was alleged that when the deceased	 and
his companion, PW-4 were proceeding in a rickshaw, pulled by
PW-3,  the  appellant and his five  companions	launched  an
attack	on  them. While PW-4 received an injury by  a  cycle
chain,	the  deceased received stab injuries, to  which	 the
succumbed  on  the  spot. On the  First	 Information  Report
lodged by PW-4, statements of three eye witnesses viz. PW-I,
an  on-looker and PWs 3 and 4 recorded during the course  of
investigation,	and  the  evidence  regarding  discovery  of
incriminating articles and find of human blood on them,	 the
appellant and his five companions were chargesheeted for the
murder of the deceased.
2
    During the trial, two of the eye-witnesses,	 viz. PWs  3
and  4	were declared hostile, since  they  expressed  their
inability  to identify the accused persons as assailants  of
the  deceased.	Though	PW 1 supported	the  prosecution  in
examination-in-chief, he expressed some doubt regarding	 the
identity  of  the appellant and one other assailant  in	 the
cross-examination. The trial court refused to place reliance
on  the	 evidence of the three eye-witnesses  and  acquitted
all, except the appellant. It convicted the appellant  under
Section	 302 IPC and sentenced him to life  imprisonment  on
the evidence that the appellant was absconding, that he	 had
discovered  the	 weapon which was found to be  stained	with
human  blood  and the factum of find of human blood  on	 the
pant worn by him at the time of his arrest- The	 appellant's
appeal	was dismissed by the High Court. While ignoring	 the
evidence  of PWs 3 and 4, the High Court relied on the	evi-
dence of PW-1 holding that his subsequent attempt to  create
a  doubt regarding the identity of the appellant was  of  no
consequence,  since  there  was intrinsic  material  in	 his
evidence to establish the presence of the appellant  amongst
the assailants of deceased. It also relied on the  discovery
evidence  and find of human blood on the weapon and  on	 the
pant he was wearing at the time of his arrest. The State did
not  prefer  an appeal against the five	 companions  of	 the
appellant who were acquitted by the trial court.
    In the appeal before this Court on behalf of the  appel-
lant  it  was  contended that (1)  the	prosecution  version
regarding the incident, particularly, the involvement of the
appellant  was highly doubtful since the correctness of	 the
First  Information Report, purported to have been lodged  by
PW4  was itself doubtful since he had disowned it;  (2)	 the
presence  of PW1 at the scene of offence and at the time  of
occurrence was highly doubtful and the High Court  committed
an  error in placing reliance on his testimony	in  examina-
tion-in-chief, while brushing aside his statement in  cross-
examination;  (3) same set of Panch witnesses had  been	 em-
ployed	for  all  the discovery panchnamas as  well  as	 the
attachment of clothes of the appellant and others and  since
PW5,  Panch witness was closely associated with	 the  family
and  was  a stock witness for the prosecution,	no  reliance
could be placed on the evidence of such a highly  interested
and  chosen witness and consequently find of human blood  on
the  weapon and the pant lost its probative value;  (4)	 the
two circumstances, viz. that the appellant was not found for
two days, and human blood was present on the weapon and	 his
pant constituted extremely thin and weak evidence to  record
a  finding of guilt, particularly, when the trial court	 had
discarded  all the eye-witnesses' evidence and	doubted	 the
contents of the FIR, and when the Serologist did not  deter-
mine the blood group of the stains on the weapon and pant of
the
3
appellant; (5) in the absence of positive evidence that	 the
fatal  injury' No. I was caused by the appellant  only,	 his
conviction substantively under Section 302 IPC could not  be
sustained;  (6) since appellant's companion were  acquitted,
and  the  State had not preferred any appeal  against  their
acquittal, he could not be convicted with the aid of Section
34 or 149 IPC, since the acquittal of the co-accused created
a  legal bar against his conviction, which could not be	 got
over by reappreciation of evidence; and (7) the eye-witness-
es' evidence could not be relied upon as their names did not
figure in the inquest report prepared at the earliest time.
    On	behalf of the State it was contended that  (1)	evi-
dence  of PWs 3 and 4 could not be treated as  effaced	from
the  record, merely because the prosecution chose  to  treat
them  as  hostile  on the limited question  of	identity  of
assailants;(2) PW-I was neither a chance witness nor was  he
faking his presence at the scene of occurrence at the  mate-
rial time; (3) it was not necessary in law to mention  names
of witnesses in the inquest report as the purpose of prepar-
ing  the  report was merely to make a note of  the  physical
condition  of the body and the marks of injury	thereon	 no-
ticed at that point of time; (4) nothing was alleged against
PW-5. Panch witness, nor the appellant had given any  expla-
nation regarding existence of human blood on the weapon	 and
his pant in his statement recorded under section 313 of	 the
Cr.  P.C.; (5) even if the appellant could not	be  substan-
tively	convicted under Section 302 II'C, he could still  be
convicted  with	 the aid of Section 34 or 149 II'C,  if	 the
Court  came  to	 the conclusion that more  than	 one  person
launched  the  attack and notwithstanding the  acquittal  of
others	by the trial court, this Court could reach  its	 own
conclusion as the higher court was not bound by the appreci-
ation of evidence by the trial court or even the High Court.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court,
    HELD:  1.1 The evidence of a prosecution witness  cannot
be rejected in toto merely because the prosecution chose  to
treat him as hostile and cross-examined him. The evidence of
such  witnesses cannot be treated as effaced or	 washed	 off
the  record altogether, but the same can be accepted to	 the
extent their version is found to be dependable on a  careful
scrutiny thereof. [13C]
    Bhagwan Singh v. State of Haryana, [1976] 2 S.C.R.	921:
Rabinder  Kumar Dey v. State of Orissa, [1976] 4 S.C.C.	 233
and  Syed  lqbal v.state of Karnataka, [1980] 1	 S.C.R.	 95,
relied on.
4		SUPREME COURT REPORTS	 [1991] 3 S.C.R.
    1.2 In the instant case the evidence of two eye-witness-
es PW 3 and 4 challenged by the prosecution in	cross-exami-
nation because they refused to name the accused in the	dock
as  the assailants of the deceased. The trial court made  no
effort	to  scrutinise the evidence of these  two  witnesses
even in regard to the factum of the incident. It refused  to
look  into their evidence treating it as non-est,  on  their
being declared hostile by the prosecution. This approach  of
the trial court is legally unacceptable. The High Court	 has
not  endeavoured to assess their evidence since	 it  thought
that  the conviction of the appellant could be sustained  on
the  evidence of PW-1. From the evidence of these  two	wit-
nesses the fact that the deceased and PW-4 came to the place
of  occurrence	in the rickshaw of PW-3 is  established.  So
also  the  fact that on their reaching the place  of  occur-
rence,	they were surrounded by some persons and an  assault
was  launched on them in which PW 4 received an	 injury	 and
the  deceased died is also established. The only  area	they
have  not supported the prosecution and resiled	 from  their
earlier statements is regarding the identity of the  assail-
ants  but  the fact remains that the deceased  had  received
three  injuries	 as  narrated by PW-12,	 who  conducted	 the
post-mortem,  and  succumbed to the injuries  on  the  spot.
Similarly,  there is no doubt at all that PW-4 had  gone  to
the  police  station and had lodged  the  First	 Information
Report.	 The  detailed narration about the incident  in	 the
First  Information Report goes to show that  the  subsequent
attempt of PW-4 to disown the document, while admitting	 his
signature,  thereon,  is a shift for reasons best  known  to
him. Once the presence of PW-4 is accepted, the presence  of
PW-3  at  the scene of occurrence cannot be  doubted.  [13D,
14C, D-F, B]
    2.	The Trial Court has not accepted PW-I's evidence  on
the ground that he was not a natural witness, and was only a
chance witness. However, on a reading of the entire evidence
of PW-I it is clear that his statement in  cross-examination
on the question of identity of the appellant and one of	 his
companions is a clear attempt to wriggle out of what he	 had
stated earlier in his examination-in-chief. Since the  inci-
dent  occurred at a public place, it is reasonable to  infer
that the street light illuminated the place sufficiently  to
enable	this witness to identify the assailants. During	 the
one month period that elapsed since the recording of  exami-
nation-in-chief,  something transpired which made him  shift
his evidence on the question of identity to help the  appel-
lant.  In the circumstance there is no doubt that  PW-I	 had
ample  opportunity  to identify the assailants	of  the	 de-
ceased,	 his  presence	at the scene of	 occurrence  is	 not
unnatural nor is his statement that he had come to  purchase
vegetables  unacceptable. There are no contradiction in	 his
evidence to doubt his testimony. He is a totally independent
wit-
5
ness,  who had no cause to give false evidence	against	 the
appellant  and	his companions. Therefore, his	evidence  is
acceptable  regarding  the  time, place and  manner  of	 the
incident  as well as the identity of the  assailants.  [14H-
16C]
    3.1 The evidence of eye-witnesses could not be  rejected
on the ground that their names did not figure in the inquest
report prepared at the earliest point of time. [16D]
    3.2	 A perusal of Section 174 of the Criminal  Procedure
Code  would clearly show that the object of the	 proceedings
under  this Section is merely to ascertain whether a  person
has  died  under suspicious circumstances  or  an  unnatural
death and if so what is the apparent cause of the death. The
question  regarding the details as tO how the  deceased	 was
assaulted or who assaulteld him or under what  circumstances
he  was assaulted is foreign to the ambit and scope  of	 the
proceedings  under  the	 section.  In  these  circumstances,
neither	 in  practice nor in law, was it necessary  for	 the
police	to have mentioned these details in the	inquest	 re-
port. [16E-F]
    Pedda  Narain v. State of Andhra Pradesh,  [1975]  Supp.
S.C.R. 84 relied on.
    4.1 There was no injunction in law against the same	 set
of  witnesses being present at the successive  enquiries  if
nothing could be urged against them. Even in the case of  an
interested party, his evidence cannot be overlooked on	that
ground. [17G. E]
    Himachal Pradesh Administration v. Omprakash,  [1972]  2
S.C.R. 765, relied on.
    4.2 In the instant case, merely because the same set  of
Panch  witnesses  were	used for Witnessing  all  the  three
discoveries as well as the attachment of the clothes of	 the
appellant  and his companions, PW-5's evidence could not  be
discarded since nothing had surfaced in crossexamination  to
shake  his evidence. Besides, except being a good  neighbour
nothing	 more is shown against him. As regards	recovery  of
weapon, as well as the appellant's blood stained pant, there
is  hardly  any	 effective cross-examination,  nor  has	 the
appellant offered any explanation in his statement  recorded
under  Section 313 of the Criminal Procedure Code. Hence  PW
5's  evidence  cannot be rejected on the  specious  plea  of
being  an  interested  witness. In  the	 circumstances,	 hi,
evidence was rightly accepted by both the courts below.	 [17
A, C -D, F, 18 A]
6
     5.1 The factum of find of the incriminating weapon from
the  appellant's  garage, and his inability to	explain	 the
presence  of human blood thereon is a  circumstance  against
him.  Similarly,  the existence of human blood on  the	pant
that he was wearing at the time of his arrest, for which  no
explanation  was  offered  by him, is  also  a	circumstance
against	 him, particularly because no injury was noticed  on
him. [18B-D]
    5.2 There is also direct testimony of PW-I, besides that
of  PWs 3 and 4. The find of human blood on the	 weapon	 and
the pant, with no explanation for the same lends  corrobora-
tion  to the testimony of PW-1. When he states that  he	 saw
the  appellant inflicting a knife blow on the  deceased.  In
the circumstances, it cannot be accepted that in the absence
of determination of blood group, the find of human blood  is
of no consequence. [19B-C]
    Kansa Behera v. State of Orissa, [1987] 3 S.C.C. 480 and
Surinder  Singh v. State of Punjab, [1989] Suppl.  2  S.C.C.
21, distinguished.
    6.1	  No doubt it is not possible from the	ocular	evi-
dence  to record a definite finding of fact that the  appel-
lant  had caused the fatal injury. On the contrary the	evi-
dence  of  PW-1 indicates that in all probability  the	stab
wound  inflicted by the appellant resulted in injury No.  2,
which by itself was not sufficient in the ordinary course of
nature to cause death. I Since the prosecution evidence does
not disclose that the fatal blow, which caused injury No.  1
was given by the appellant, it means that the fatal blow was
given  by someone else, and this establishes the  fact	that
more  than one person participated in the commission of	 the
crime.	On  an independent examination appreciation  of	 the
evidence  of  the three eye-witnesses, viz. PWs 1, 3  and  4
that  several persons had participated in the commission  of
the crime. The failure on the part of PWs 3 and 4 to identi-
fy  the	 others does not alter the situation. On  the  other
hand,  from the evidence of PW 1, it is clear that  some  of
the  accused  participated in the commission of	 the  crime.
[19E, 25A-C]
    6.2 No doubt in the absence of a State appeal, the	High
Court  could  not,  nor can this Court	interfere  with	 the
acquittal of the co-accused, but this Court is not bound  by
the  facts found proved on the appreciation of	evidence  by
the courts below, and is, in law, entitled to reach its	 own
conclusion  different  from the one recorded by	 the  courts
below  on  a review of the evidence. The  acquittal  of	 the
accused	 does not create a legal bar against the  conviction
of  the	 appellant with the aid of Section 34  or  149	IPC.
[21C-F]
7
Brathi v. State of Punjab, [1991] 1 SCC 519, affirmed.
      Baikuntha	 Nath  Chaudhury  v. The  State	 of  Orissa,
[1973] 2 SCC 432; Kasturi Lal v. State of Haryana, [1976]  3
SCC  570; Chandubhai Shanabhai Parmdr v. State	of  Gujarat,
[1981]	Suppl.	SCC 46; Sukh Ram v. State  of  M.P.,  [1989]
Suppl. 1 SCC 214 and Krishna Govind Patil v. State of  Maha-
rashtra, [1964] 1 SCR 678, distinguished.
      6.3  In the circumstances, the conviction of  the	 ap-
pellant	 can be sustained with the aid of Section 34 or	 149
as the case may be and it is safe to confirm the appellant's
conviction with the aid of section 34 I.P.C. [25D]
      The  conviction of the appellant is  accordingly	con-
firmed and sentence awarded to him is maintained. [25E]
      7.  The  omission to refer to the decision  of  larger
Bench  rendered Krishna Govind Patil's case does not  render
the  decision  in Brathi's case per incuriam. In  any  event
that  decision	does not take a view inconsistent  with	 the
ratio laid down in Brathi's case. [24G]
Sukh  Ram  v.  State of M.P., [1989] suppl. 1  SCC  214	 and
Brathi v.
State of Punjab, [1991] 1 SCC 519 referred to.



JUDGMENT:
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No.413 of 1982.

From the JUdgment and Order dated 12.1. 1982 of the Madhya Pradesh High Court in Criminal Appeal No. 7 of 1979.

U.R. Lalit, Prithvi Raj, S.S. Khanduja, J.P. Dubey, Y.P. Dhingra, B.K. Satija, Uma Nath Singh, S. Karnail and S.K. Gambhir for the appearing parties.

The Judgment of the Court was delivered by AHMADI, J. This appeal by special leave is preferred by the appellant Khujji @ Surender Tiwari who has been convicted by both the courts below under section 302 IPC for the murder of one Gulab. The facts leading to this appeal, briefly stated, are that on the evening of May 20,1978 the deceased Gulab and his companion PW4 Ramesh Chander hired a Rickshaw to go to the dispensary of Dr. Mukherjee. PW 3 Kishan Lal pulled the Rickshaw and while he was passing through Suji Mohalla near Panchsheel Talkies the appellant and his companions surrounded the Rickshaw and launched an attack on the deceased and his companion. PW 4 was the first to receive an injury by a cycle chain. Sensing trouble both Gulab and PW 4 jumped out of the Rickshaw and ran in differ- ent directions. Gulab ran towards Suji Mohalla whereas PW 4 ran towards Panchsheel Talkies. They were chased by the assailants who formed themselves into two groups. PW 4 was fortunate enough to escape with not too serious an injury but his companion Gulab received stab wounds to which he succumbed on the spot. The evidence of PW 12 Dr. Nagpal shows that the deceased had received three injuries, namely,

(i) a penetrating stab wound with a second injury on the intercostal space on right side rib of the size of 3 cms x 5cms x Icm, (ii) a piercing stab wound 8cms below the scapu- lar bone and 8cms outside the vertibral column of the size of 2.5cms x 1.5cms x 3cms, and (iii) an incised wound on the frontal auxiliary line 2.5cms x 1.Scms x 2cms deep on the left hipocardium region. This witness, who performed the post-mortem, deposed that injury No.1 which had injured the heart was sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death. He further stated that all the three injuries were collectively sufficient to cause death in ordinary course of nature. The three articles, namely, the knife, the Chhuri and the Chhura which were attached in the course of investigation were shown to this witness and he stated that the three injuries were possible by the aforesaid articles. It is clear from this evidence that Gulab died a homicidal death.

To bring home the guilt against the appellant the prose- cution placed reliance on the evidence of three eye-witness- es, namely, PW 1 Komal Chand (an on-looker), PW 3 Kishan Lal (the Rickshaw Puller) and PW 4 Ramesh (the companion of the deceased) besides the find of human blood on the weapon discovered at the instance of the appellant and on the lant which he was wearing at the time of his arrest. The First Information Report, Exh. P-3, was lodged by PW 4 Ramesh immediately after the incident and the same was recorded by the Investigating Officer PW 13 Ramji Singh at about 9.15 p.m. In the said first information report PW 4 gave the details regarding the incident and furnished the names of all the six assailants. Soon after the first infor- mation report was lodged the Investigating Officer visited the scene of occurrence and drew up the Panchnama on the basis of which a sketch plan Exh. P-20A was prepared in due course. The appellant and some of his companions could not be traced till May 22, 1978. After they were traced, they were interrogated and on their expressing willingness to discover the weapons used in the commission of the crime, the Investigating Officer summoned two wit- nesses, namely, PW 5 Panna Lal and Rajinder to act as Panch witnesses. The prosecution case is that in the presence of these witnesses the appellant and his companions made cer- tain confessional statements under section 27 of Evidence Act which led to the discovery of the weapons used in the commission of the crime. According to the prosecution the appellant Khujji discovered a Chhura (knife) from his garage and the same was attached under the Panchnama Exh. P-9. Since this weapon had bloodlike stains, it was sent to the Chemical Analyser and Serologist for examination and report. The report indicates that it was stained with human blood but the blood group could not be determined. The other two companions of the appellant, namely, Parsu and Guddu, also discovered a knife, Exh.[P-7, and a Chhura, Exh. P-13, which were attached under Panchnamas Exh] P-6 and P-12, respec- tively. As stated earlier the shirt and pant of Khujji were also attached as blood-like stains were noticed thereon. Both these articles were sent to the Chemical Analyser and Serologist. So far as the shirt is concerned, since the blood stains were disintegrated it was not possible to determine the origin thereof. But so far as the pant is concerned, the report states that the stains were of human blood but the blood group could not be determined as the result of the test was inconclusive. On the basis of the first information report, the statements of three witnesses recorded in the course of investigation as well as the evidence regarding discovery and the find of human blood on the incriminating articles, the appellant and five others were charge-sheeted for the murder of Gulab. The trial court acquitted all except the appellant. Before the trial court PW 4 Ramesh, who had lodged the first information report, tried to disown it. He was declared hostile as he expressed his inability to identify the accused persons as the assail- ants of the deceased Gulab. PW 3, the Rickshaw Puller, while narrating the incident expressed a similar inability and he too was treated as hostile and cross-examined by the Public Prosecutor. The third eye-witness PW 1 Komal chand, however, supported the prosecution case in his examination-in-chief but in his cross-examination he expressed some doubt regard- ing the identity of the appellant and Guddu stating that he had seen their backs only. The trial court came to the conclusion that not only was this witness a chance witness but his presence at the scene of occurrence was extremely doubtful as it was difficult to believe that he had come out at that hour to purchase vegetables. Thus the trial court refused to place reliance on the evidence of the three eye- witnesses. The trial court, however, came to the conclusion that the appellant was absconding and that he had discovered the weapon which was found to be stained with human blood. It also relied on the factum of find of human blood on the pant worn by the appellant at the time of his arrest. On the basis of this evidence the trial court convicted the appellant under section 302 IPC and sentenced him to life imprisonment. Khujji preferred an appeal against the said conviction. The High Court while ignoring the evidence of PW 3 Kishan Lal and PW 4 Ramesh relied on the evidence of PW 1 Komal Chand and came to the conclusion that his evidence clearly estab- lished the presence of the appellant as one of the assail- ants notwithstanding his effort in cross-examination to wriggle out of his statement in examination-inchief in regard to the identity of the appellant. The High Court noticed that the examination-in-chief of this witness was recorded on November 16, 1976 whereas his cross-examination commenced on December 15, 1976 i.e. after a month and in between he seemed to have been won over or had succumbed to threat. This inference was drawn on the basis of PW 3's statement that he was severely beaten on the night previous to his appearance in court as a witness. The High Court, therefore, took the view that the subsequent attempt of PW 1 Komal Chand to create a doubt regarding the identity of the appellant was of no consequence since there was intrinsic material in his evidence to establish the presence of the appellant amongst the assailants of deceased Gulab. Relying further on the discovery evidence as well as the find of human blood on the weapon found from the garage of the appellant and on his pant which he was wearing at the time of his arrest, the High Court came to the conclusion that his conviction was well founded and dismissed his appeal. It may here be mentioned that the State did not prefer an appeal against the five companions of the appellant who came to be acquitted by the trial court. It is in these circum- stances that the appellant has invoked this Court's juris- diction under Article 136 of the Constitution. Mr. U.R. Lalit, learned counsel for the appellant, took us through the entire evidence and submitted that the prose- cution version regarding the incident, particularly the involvement of the appellant, is highly doubtful since the correctness of the statement made in the first information report purporting to have been lodged by PW 4 Ramesh is itself doubtful because Ramesh himself has dis-owned it. Since the prosecution had declared both PW 3 Kishan Lal and PW 4 Ramesh as hostile to the prosecution the trial court was justified in refusing to rely on their evidence. He further submitted that the presence of PW 1 Komal Chand at the place of occurrence at that hour was highly doubtful and this doubt was reinforced by his conduct in not raising a hue and cry or going to the help of the victim. The evidence disclosed that this witness resides at a place almost two furlongs from the scene of occurrence and claims to have seen the incident from a distance of about 22 feet from a point wherefrom the incident could not have been witnessed by him as is evident from the physical condition of the locality described in this sketch Exh. P-20A. He, therefore,/ submitted that the trial court was justified in describing this witness as a chance witness and in doubting his presence at the scene of occurrence at the relevant point of time. According to him the High Court committed an error in placing reliance on the testimony of this witness. He, however, submitted that the trial court was not justi- fied in recording the conviction on the mere fact that the appellant could not be found for two days and there was human blood on his weapon and pant attached in the course of investigation. These two circumstances, contended counsel, constituted extremely thin and weak evidence to record a finding of guilt particularly when the trial Court had discarded the evidence of all the three eye-witnesses and had doubted the contents of the first information report Exh. P-3. Lastly he submitted that the High Court committed an error in brushing aside the statement made by PW 1 Komal Chand in his cross-examination which went to show that his evidence regarding identity of the appellant was highly suspect. Merely because there was a time gap between his examination-in-chief and his cross-examination the High Court was not justified in jumping to the conclusion that the accused party had succeeded in winning him over by threat or otherwise. On this line of reasoning Mr. Lalit contended that the High Court ought not to have interfered with the appreciation of his evidence by the trial court. Besides these submissions based on the evidence of the three eyewitnesses and the find of human blood on the weapon and pant of the appellant, Mr. Lalit further submitted that one set of Panch witnesses, PW 5 Pannalal and Rajinder (not examined), had been employed for all the discovery panchna- mas as well as the attachment of clothes of the appellant and others which went to show that PW 5 was a stock witness for the prosecution. He, therefore, submitted that no reli- ance could be placed on the evidence of PW 5 and consequent- ly the find of human blood on the weapon and the pant looses its probative value. In the end he submitted that the con- viction of the appellant substantively under section 302 IPC was not well founded for the simple reason that not a single witness had deposed that the fatal injury was caused by the appellant. The evidence of PW 12 Dr. Nagpal shows that the deceased had three injuries and out of them only injury No. 1 was by itself sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death. So far as injuries Nos. 2 and 3 are con- cerned, the medical evidnce does not show that each one of them separately was sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death. But the medical evidence is to the effect that all the three injuries taken collectively Were SuffiCient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death. In the absence of positive evidence that injury No. 1 was caused by the appellant and none else, his conviction substantively under section 302 cannot be sustained. In that case at best he can be convicted for hurt under Section 324, IPC.

further submitted that since his companions were acquit- ted and the State had not preferred any appeal against their acquittal he could not be convicted with the aid of sections 34 or 149 IPC.

Mr. Prithvi Singh, the learned counsel for the State, submitted that the trial court was wrong in rejecting the evidence of PWs 3 and 4 merely because they were declared hostile as if their evidence was totally against the prose- cution on that account. He submitted that their evidence cannot be treated as effaced from the record merely because the prosecution chose to treat them as hostile on the limit- ed question of identity of the assailants. Their evidence as to the occurrence and number of persons involved in the commis- sion of the crime can be relied upon along with that of PW 1 as he was neither a chance witness nor was he faking his presence at the scene of occurrence at the material time. His evidence regarding identity of the assailants is equally acceptable and his subsequent statement made in crossexami- nation after a time gap of almost one month was rightly brushed aside by the High Court, whatever be the reason for his change of heart. With regard to the criticism regarding the absence of names of witnesses in the Inquest Report, counsel urged that it was not necessary in law to mention the names of the witnesses in the inquest report as the purpose of preparing the inquest report was merely to make a note of the physical condition of the body and the marks of injury there of noticed at that point of time. On the ques- tion of value to be attached to the evidence of the Panch witness PW 5, counsel submitted that nothing was alleged against this witness nor had the appellant given any expla- nation regarding existence of human blood on the weapon and the pant attached from him in his statement recorded under section 313 of the Code. On the question regarding the offence committed by the appellant, counsel submitted that once it is proved that more than one person had participated in the assault, the appellant could be convicted for the murder of the deceased with the aid of section 34 or 149 IPC. He, therefore, submitted that the appeal is without merit and deserves to be dismissed.

We have given our anxious consideration to the submis- sions made by the learned counsel for the contesting par- ties. The fact that an incident of the type alleged by the prosecution occurred on May 20, 1978 at about 8.20 p.m. is not seriously disputed nor is the location of the incident doubted. The evidence of PW 3 Kishan Lal and PW 4 Ramesh came to be rejected by the trial court because they were declared hostile to the prose- cution by the learned Public Prosecutor as they refused to identify the appellant and his companions in the dock as the assailants of the deceased. But counsel for the State is right when he submits that the evidence of a witness, de- clared hostile, is not wholly effaced from the record and that part of evidence which is otherwise acceptable can be acted upon. It seems to be well settled by the decisions of this Court Bhagwan Singh v. State of Haryana, [1976] 2 SCR 921; Rabinder Kumar Dey v. State of Orissa, [1976] 4 SCC 233 and Syed lqbal v. State of Karnataka, [1980] 1 SCR 95 that the evidence of a prosecution witness cannot be rejected in toto merely because the prosecution chose to treat him as hostile and crossexamined him. The evidence of such witness- es cannot be treated as effaced or washed off the record altogether but the same can be accepted to the extent their version is found to be dependable on a careful scrutiny thereof. In the present case the evidence of the aforesaid two eye-witnesses was challenged by the prosecution in cross-examination because they refused to name the accused in the dock as the assailants of the deceased. We are in agreement with the submission of the learned counsel for the State that the trial court made no effort to scrutinise the evidence of these two witnesses even in regard to the factum of the incident. On a careful consideration of their evi- dence it becomes crystal clear that PW 4 had accompanied the deceased in PW 3's rickshaw to the place of incident. In the incident that occurred at the location pointed out by the prosecution, PW 4 sustained an injury. His presence in the company of the deceased at the place of occurrence, there- fore, cannot be doubted. Immediately after the incident within less than an hour thereof PW 4 went to the police station and lodged the first information report. It is true that the first information report is not substantive evi- dence but the fact remains that immediately after the inci- dent and before there was any extraneous intervention PW 4 went to the police station and narrated the incident. The first information report is a detailed document and it is not possible to believe that the investigating officer imagined those details and prepared the document Exh. P 3. The detailed narration about the incident in the first information report goes to show that the subsequent attempt of PW 4 to dis-own the document, while admitting his signa- ture thereon, is a shift for reasons best known to PW 4. We are, therefore, not prepared to accept the criticism that the version regarding the incident is the result of some fertile thinking on the part Of the investigating officer. We are satisfied, beyond any manner of doubt, that PW 4 had gone to the police station and had lodged the first information report. To the extent he has been contradicted with the facts stated in the first information report shows that he has tried to resile from his earlier version regarding the incident. So also the presence of PW 3 at the scene of occurrence cannot be doubt- ed once the presence of PW 4 is accepted. The trial court did not go so far as to say that both these witnesses were not present at the scene of occurrence or that PW 4 was not injured in the incident but refused to look into their evidence treating their evidence as non-est on their' being declared hostile by the prosecution. We think that the ap- proach of the trial court insofar as the evidence of these two witnesses is concerned, is legally unacceptable. The High Court has not endeavoured to assess their evidence since it thought that the conviction of the appellant could be sustained on the evidence of PW 1 Komal Chand. We are satisfied on a close scrutiny of the evidence of the afore- said two eyewitnesses, PWs 3 and 4, that the deceased and PW 4 came to the place of occurrence in the rickshaw pulled by PW 3. On reaching the spot where the incident occurred they were surrounded by certain persons who were lying in wait and a murderous assault was launched on them. The first to receive the injury was PW 4. When they gauged the intention of their assailants they jumped out of the rickshaw and both ran in different directions. The appellant first tried to chase PW 4 but later he turned to the deceased as he was informed by one of his companions Gopal that the person he was pursuing was not Gulab. Therefore, from the evidence of these two eye-witnesses the fact that the deceased and PW 4 came to the place of occurrence in the rickshaw of PW 3 is established. So also the fact that on their reaching the place of occUrrence they were surrounded by some persons and an assault was launched on them in which PW 4 received an injury and Gulab died is clearly established. The only area where they have not supported the prosecution and have resiled from their earlier statements is regarding the identity of the assailants. We will deal with that part of the evidence a little later but the fact remains that the deceased had received three injuries as narrated by PW 12 Dr. Nagpal, to which he succumbed on the spot. Once these facts are accepted as proved, the only question which really survives for consideration is whether the appellant was an assailant of the deceased.

That brings us to the evidence of PW 1 Komal Chand. Komal Chand's evidence was not accepted by the trial court on the ground that he was not a natural witness and was only a chance witness. PW 1 explained his presence by stating that he had gone to the market to purchase vegetables and while he was returning therefrom on foot with his cycle in hand he heard a commotion and saw the incident from a short distance. Being a resident of Suji Mohalla, the place of occurrence was clearly in the vicinity thereof and, therefore, his presence at the market place could not be considered to be unnatural. It is not unnatural for working people to purchase vegetables at that hour and, therefore, his explanation regarding his presence cannot be ruled out as false. The sketch map prepared by PW 11 Gaiser Prasad shows that he had seen the incident from a short distance of hardly 22 feet although PW 1 says he saw it from the square. Since the incident occurred at a public place with a lamp-post nearby, the possibility of his having identified the assailants could not be ruled out. The exami- nation-i-nchief of this witness was recorded on November 16, 1976 when he identified all the assailants by name. He stated that he knew the six accused persons in court and they were the persons who had surrounded the rickshaw and launched an assault on PW 4 and the deceased Gulab. Of them Gopal struck PW 4 with a chain. He also stated that the appellant Khujji and his companions Gudda and Parsu were armed with knives and when Khujji tried to assault PW 4 with a knife, Gopal shouted Khujji that man is not Gulab". There- upon Khujji and his companions ran after the Gulab, overtook him and the appellant, Parsu and Gudda assaulted Gulab with their weapons. Gudda struck Gulab from the front on his chest, Parsu stabbed him on the side of the stomach while Ram Kishan and Gopal held him and the appellant attacked him from behind with a knife whereupon Gulab staggered shouting 'save-save' and fell in front of the house of Advocate Chintaman Sahu. Thereafter all the six persons ran away. His cross examination commenced on 15th December, 1978. In his crossexamination he stated that the appellant Khujji and Gudda had their backs towards him and hence he could not see their faces while he could identify the remaining four persons. He stated that he had inferred that the other two persons were the appellant and Gudda. On the basis of this statement Mr.Lalit submitted that the evidence regarding the identity of the appellant is rendered highly doubtful and it would be hazardous to convict the appellant solely on the basis of identification by such a wavering witness. The High Court came to the conclusion and, in our opinion rightly, that during the one month period that elapsed since the recording of his examination-in-chief something transpired which made him shift his evidence on the question of identi- ty to help the appellant. We are satisfied on a reading of his entire evidence that his statement in cross-examination on the question of identity of the appellant and his compan- ion is a clear attempt to wriggle out of what he had stated earlier in his examination-in-chief.

Since the incident occurred at a public place, it is reason- able to infer that the street lights illuminated the place sufficiently to enable this witness to identify the assail- ants. We have, therefore, no hesitation in concluding that he had ample opportunity to identify the assailants of Gulab, his presence at the scene of occurrence is not unnat- ural nor his statement that he had come to purchase vegata- bles unacceptable:We do not find any material contradictions in his evidence to doubt his testimony. He is a totally independent witness who had no cause to give false evidence against the appellant and his companions. We are, therefore, not impressed by the reasons which weighed that the trial court for rejecting his evidence. We agree with the High Court that his evidence is acceptable regarding the time, place and manner of the incident as well as the identity of the assailants.

It was faintly submitted by counsel for the appellant that the evidence of eye-witnesses could not be relied upon as their names did not figure in the inquest report prepared at the earliest point'of time. We see no force in this submission in view of the clear pronouncement of this Court in Pedda Narain v. State of Andhra Pradesh, [1975] Supp. SCR

84. Referring to section 174 of the Code of Criminal Proce- dure this Court observed at page 89 as under:

"A perusal of this provision would clearly show that the object of the proceedings under section 174 is merely to ascertain whether a person has died under suspicious circumstances or an unnatural death and if so what is the apparent cause of the death. The question regarding the details as to how the deceased was assaulted or who assaulted him or under what circumstances he was assaulted appears to us to be foreign to the ambit and scope of the proceedings under section 174. In these cir- cumstances, therefore, neither in practice nor in law was it necessary for the police to have mentioned these details in the inquest report".
We, respectfully agree and see no merit in this submission made by the counsel for the appellant.

After the appellant and his two companions Parsu and Gudda were arrested they were interrogated by the investi- gating officer PW 13 Ramji Singh. In the course of interro- gation they showed their willingness to point out the weap- ons of assault. thereupon the investigating officer called two Panchas, one of them being PW 5 Panna Lal. The very same Panch witnesses were panchas to all the three discovery panchnamas as well as panchnamas regard- ing the attachment of the clothes worn by the appellant and his companions. It was, therefore, contended by the counsel for the appellant that PW 5 Panna Lal was a stock witnes whom the police had employed to act as a panch witness. Pointing out that it was Tulsi Ram the brother of the de- ceased who had chosen him because he was closely associated with the family of the deceased and was intimated with Babulal another brother of the deceased, Mr. Lalit submitted that no reliance can be placed on the evidence of such an highly interested and specially chosen witness. The witness comes from the same locality and his house is situate within 100 yards of the residence of the deceased. He knows the family of the deceased quite well being a neighbour and of the same 'biradari'. It is equally true that he had gone to the hospital on learning about the assault on Gulab and had stayed back with Babulal since the latter was not feeling well. But would it be proper to throw out his evidence on account of his neighbourly relations with the family of the deceased, when nothing has been brought out in crossexamina- tion to shake the intrinsic value to be attached to his evidence? Even in the cross-examination of the investigating officer nothing has been brought out to infer that the choice of PW 5 as a Panch witness was a deliberate one made with a view to enlisting his support to the prosecution case. The mere fact that he was a witness to all the Panch- namas prepared by the investigating officer is by itself not sufficient to discard his evidence. Even in the case of an interested witness, it is settled law that his evidence cannot be overlooked merely on that ground but at the most it must receive strict scrutiny. In the case of PW 5, except being a good neighbour nothing more is shown. On the ques- tion of recovery of the weapon as well as the blood stained pant of the appellant there is hardly any effective crose- examination. Nor has the appellant offered any explanation in his statement recorded under section 3 13 of the Code. In these circumstances we are not prepared to reject his evi- dence on the specious plea of his being an interested wit- ness. In `Himachal Pradesh Administration v. Om Prakash,' [1972] 2 SCR 765 this Court observed at page 777 that it could not be laid down as a matter of law and practice that where recoveries have 'been effected from different places on the information furnished by the accused, different sets of persons should be called in to witness them. There was no injunction in law against the same set of witnesses being present at the successive enquiries if nothing could be urged against them. It is, therefore, clear from the deci- sion of this Court that merely because the same set of Panch witnesses were used for witnessing all the three discoveries as well as the attachment of the clothes of the appellant and his companions, PW5's evidence could not be discarded since nothing had surfaced in cross- examination to shake his evidence. We are, therefore, satis- fied that the evidence of PW5 Pannalal was rightly accepted by both the courts below. We make limited use of this evi- dence in the sense that we do not use any part of the evi- dence admissible under section 27. Evidence Act, against the appellant. We merely use the factum of find of the incrimi- nating weapon from his garage and his inability to explain the presence of human blood thereon as a circumstance against the appellant. The evidence of PW5 further shows that when the appellant was arrested his garments, namely, shirt and pant were attached as blood-like stains were noticed thereon. These articles were sent to the Chemical Analyser and Serologist for examination and report. As stated earlier these reports reveal that the blood stains on the pant worn by the appellant were of human origin. The appellant has not offered any plausible explanation for the existence of human blood on his pant. This too is a circum- stance against the appellant particularly because no injury was noticed on the person of the appellant.

Mr. Lalit, however, argued that since the report of the serologist does not determine the blood group of the stains on the weapon and the pant of the appellant, the mere find of human blood on these two articles is of no consequence, whatsoever. In support of this contention he placed strong reliance on the decisions of this Court in Kansa Behera v. State of Orissa, [1987] 3 SCC 480 and Surinder Singh v. State of Punjab, [1989] Suppl. 2 SCC 21. In the first men- tioned case the conviction was sought to be sustained on three circumstances, namely, (i) the appellant and the deceased were last seen together; (ii) a dhoti and a shirt recovered from the possession of the appellant were found to be stained with human blood; and (iii) the appellant had made an extra-judicial confession to two witnesses when arrested. There was no dispute in regard to the first cir- cumstance and the third circumstance was held not satisfac- torily proved. In this backdrop the question for considera- tion was whether the first and the second circumstances were sufficient to convict the appellant. This Court, therefore, observed that a few small bloodstains could be of the appel- lant himself and in the absence of evidence regarding blood group it cannot conclusively connect the bloodstanis with the blood of the deceased. In these circumstances this Court refused to draw any inference of guilt on the basis of the said circumstance since it was not 'conclusive' evidence. This Court, however, did not go so far as to say that such a circumstance does not even provide a link in the chain of circumstances on which the prosecution can place reliance. In the second case also this Court did not consider the evidence regarding the find of human blood on the knife sufficient to convict the appellant in the absence of determination of blood group since the evidence of PW 2 was found to be uninspiring and there was no other circumstance to connect him with the crime. In this case we have the direct testimony of PW 1 Komal Chand, besides the testimony of PWs 3 and 4 which we have consid- ered earlier. The find of hunam blood on the weapon and the pant of the appellant lends coroboration to the testimony of PW 1 Komal Chand when he states that he had seen the appel- lant inflicting a knife blow on the deceased. The appellant has not explained the presence of human blood on these two articles. We are, therefore, of the opinion that the afore- said two decisions turned on the peculiar facts of each case and they do not lay down a general proposition that in the absence of determination of blood group the find of human blood on the weapon or garment of the accused is of no consequence. We, therefore, see no substance in this conten- tion urged by Mr. Lalit.

That brings us to the last contention whether the con- viction of the appellant for the substantive offence of murder can be sustained in the absence of a finding that the fatal injury No. 1 was caused by the appellant. We must at once acceptt the fact that it is not possible from the ocular evidence to record a definte of fact that the appel- lant had caused that fatal injury. On the contrary the evi- dence of PW 1 Komal Chand indicates that in all probability the stab wound inflicted by the appellant resulted in injury No. 2. that injury by itself was not sufficient in the oridinary course of nature to cause death. If that be so, can the appellant be convicted under section 302, IPC? Counsel for the appellant submits that the legal position is well-settled by a chain of decisions of this Court that if named accused are acquitted except one of the them, the latter cannot be convicted with the aid of section 34 or 149, IPC. In support of this contention he invited our attention to a few decisions, namely, Baikuntha Nath Chaud- hury v. The State of Orissa, [1973] 2 SCC 432; Kasturi Lal v. The State of Haryana, [1976] 3 SCC 570; Chandubhai Sha- nabhai Parmar v. State of Gujarat, [1981] Suppl. SCC 46 and Sukh Ram v. State of M.P., [1989] Suppl. 1 SCC 214. Counsel for the state, however, submitted that while it may be correct that the appellant cannot be substantively convicted under section 302, IPC, he can certainly be convicted with the aid of section 34 or 149, IPC, if this Court on a reap- preciation of the evidence comes to the conclusion that more than one person, may be six or seven of them, had launched an attack on the deceased. In this connection he submitted that notwithstanding the acquittal of others by the Trial Court this Court can reach its own conclusion regarding the number of persons who attacked the deceased for the obvious reason that the higher Court is not bound by the appreciation of evidence by the Trial Court or even the High Court. In support of this contention he placed strong reliance on this Court's recent decision in Brathi v. State of Punjab, [199 1] 1 SCC 519. Counsel for the appellant on the other hand contended that the acquittal of the co-accused creates a legal bar against the conviction of the appellant on the ground that they were privy to the crime notwithstanding their acquittal and this legal bar cannot be got over by reappreciation of evidence. In support of this contention he invited our attention to a Five-Judge Bench decision in Krishna Govind Patil V. State of Maharashtra, [1964] 1 SCR 678 and contended 'that the said decision was binding on us being of a larger bench and the decision in Brathi's case must be taken to be per incuriam since it had failed to notice and runs counter to the said larger bench decision. We are of the opinion, for reasons which we will immediately state, that the contention urged by counsel for the appel- lant is not well-founded.

The ratio of the decision of this Court in Brathi's case may be noticed at the outset to appreciate the contention urged by counsel for the appellant. In that case, the appel- lant and his uncle were tried under section 302/34, IPC. The Trial Court acquitted the appellant's uncle but convicted the appellant under section 302, IPC. The order of acquittal became final because the State did not choose to challenge it in appeal. The appellant, however, preferred an appeal against his conviction to the High Court. The `High Court on a reappreciation of the evidence held that the fatal blow was given by the appellant's uncle and since the appellant was charged under section 302/34, IPC, he could not be convicted substantively under section 302, IPC. However, for assessing the credibility of the prosecution case, the High Court incidentally considered the involvement of the appel- lant's uncle and held that the eye witnesses had given a truthful account of the occurrence and the appellant's uncle had actually participated in the commission of the crime along with the appellant. In other words, the High Court came to the conclusion that the acquittal of the appellant's uncle was erroneous but since there was no appeal preferred by the State it could not interfere with that order of acquittal. It, however, came to the conclusion that the crime was committed by the appellant and his uncle in fur- therance of their common intention and accordingly main- tained the conviction of the appellant under section 302, IPC, with the aid of section 34, IPC. Before this Court the appellant contended that on the acquittal of his uncle the sharing of common intention disappeared and the High Court was not justified in invoking section 34 for maintaining the conviction against him under section 302, IPC. This Court while dealing with this submis- sion held that in the matter of appreciation of evidence the powers of the Appellate Court are as wide as that of the Trial Court and the High Court was, therefore, entitled in law to review the entire evidence and to arrive at its own conclusion about the facts and circumstances emerging there- from. To put it differently, this Court came to the conclu- sion that the High Court was not bound by the appreciation of the evidence made by the Trial Court and it was free to reach its own conclusions as to the proof or otherwise of the circumstances relied upon by the prosecution on a review of the evidence of the prosecution witnesses. This Court, therefore, held that when several persons are alleged to have committed an offence in furtherance of their common intention and all except one are acquitted, it is open to the Appellate Court under Sub-section (1)(b) of section 386 of the code to find out on a reappraisal of the evidence who were the persons involved in the commission of the crime and although it could not interfere with the order of acquittal in the absence of a State appeal it was entitled to deter- mine the actual offence committed by the convicted person. Where on the reappreciation of the evidence the Appellate Court comes to the conclusion that the appellant and the acquitted accused were both involved in the commission of the crime, the Appellate Court can record a conviction with the the aid of section 34 notwithstanding the acquittal of the co-accused the appellate Court cannot reverse the order of acquittal in the absence of a State appeal, it cannot at the same time be hedged by the appreciation of the evidence by the lower court if that appreciation of evidence is found to be erroneous. This Court, therefore, pointed out that in such a fact-situation it is open to the Appellate Court to record a finding of guilt with the aid of section 34 not- withstanding the acquittal of the co-accused since the English doctrine of repugnancy on the face of record has no application in this country as we are governed by our own statutory law. On this ratio this Court confirmed the con- viction of the appellant under section 302, IPC, but with the aid of section 34, IPC. The fact-situation before us is more or less similar.

Several decisions were cited in support of the conten- tion that where two named persons are charged for the com- mission of an offence with the aid of section 34, IPC and one of them is acquitted the other cannot be convicted with the aid of section 34, IPC. Dealing with these decisions this Court observed in Brathi's case that all the decisions relied on were distinguishable on the ground that in none of them the Appellate Court was shown to have disagreed with the Trial Court's appreciation of evidence but on the con- trary the Appellate Court had proceeded on the footing that the appreciation of evidence by the Trial Court was correct. We think that the cases on which Mr. Lalit has placed reliance can also be distinguished on the same ground.

In Baikuntha Nath Chaudhury's case the evidence of two eye witnesses PWs 9 and 10 was to the effect that accused Nos. 1 and 2 had killed their brother with the active par- ticipation of accused No. 3, their mother. According to the prosecution accused No. 2, the appellant, had called the deceased tohis house and while he was there accused No. 1 inflicted two lathi blows which proved fatal. The dead body was then put m a gunny bag supplied by accused No. 3 and drowned into a nearby tank. The three accused persons were charged under sections 302/34, and 201, IPC. The Trial Court acquitted accused No. 3 but found the other two guilty. On appeal the High Court acquitted accused No. 1 rejecting the prosecution evidence in regard to his involvement but con- firmed the conviction of accused No. 2 under section 302/34, IPC, though the fatal injuries were inflicted by the acquit- ted accused No. 1. It will thus be noticed that on a reap- preciation of evidence by the High Court accused No. 1 came to be acquitted although he was stated to have given the fatal lathi blows while his brother, the appellant, was convicted on the same evidence. This Court, therefore, concluded that if the evidence of the two eye witnesses were to be accepted, accused No. 1 could not be acquitted since according to them it was he who had given the fatal blows while the appellant had merely caught hold of him. This Court, therefore, observed in paragraph 12 of the judgment that if the occurrence spoken to by PWs 9 and lois accepted, the appellant will be constructively liable for his involve- ment, though the fatal injuries were inflicted by his broth- er. In that case his brother will also be guilty of the said offence. But since the High Court had acquitted the first accused it meant that the High Court did not accept the evidence of PWs 9 and 10 in regard to the incident. This Court did not come to the conclusion that the High Court's appreciation of evidence in regard a accused No.1 was not proper. In fact it did not examine the case from that point of view but held that since the High Court had not accepted the evidence of PWs 9 and 10 in regard to the part played by the acquitted accused, the appellant could not have been convicted on of the same appreciation of evidence. This becomes clear on a close reading of paragraphs 12 and 13 of the judgment. Similarly in the case of Kasturi Lal this Court came to the conclusion that the reasons given by the High Court for distinguishing the case of Kasturi Lal from that of Khazan Singh and Gurdial Singh were not correct and, therefore', it was not justified in convicting Kasturi Lal. So, when the case of Kasturi Lal was not distinguishable from that of the above two, this Court felt that the High Court erred in con- victing Kasturi Lal. It will thus be seen that this Court came to the conclusion that the reasons Which weighed with the High Court for the distinction drawn were not correct and hence the conviction of Kasturi Lal 'had to be set aside This decision also does not help the appellant. In Chandub- hai's case the prosecution relied on the testimony of PWs 1, 5 and 6 'Both the courts below found their testimony to be unreliable in several particulars and acquired the co- accused of the appellant in two stages. This Court concluded that the appellant's case could not be distinguished from that of his two acquitted companions insofar as the reli- ability of the ocular evidence of three eye witnesses was concerned. It was in the said circumstances that this Court thought that the conviction of the appellant under section 302/34, IPC was not justified, particularly, after the evidence of the three witnesses was found to be unreliable. this also, therefore, is not a case where the Appellate Court disagreed with the appreciation of the evidence by the Trial Court and came to a different conclusion regarding the participation of others in the commission of the crime. In Sukh Ram's case to which one of us (Ahmadi. J.) was a party, this Court interferred with the conviction of the appellant recorded with the aid of section 34 by the High Court because on the facts found proved on evidence the conviction of the appellant could not be sustained on the acquittal of the co-accused on the same set of established facts. This Court on its own did not come to the conclusion that the acquittal of Gokul was not well-founded as High Court's appreciation of evidence was not correct. Had it come to that conclusion it could have recorded a conviction of the appellant under section 302/34, IPC, notwithstanding the acquittal of Gokul. Therefore, all the aforesaid cases are clearly distinguishable from the facts of Brathi's case where the High Court had clearly departed from the apprecia- tion of the evidence by the Trial Court and had reached own conclusion in regard to the proof of various facts and circumstances relied on by the prosecution. We are, there- fore. in respectful agreement with the distinction drawn by this Court on the ground that in none of the cases cited on behalf of the appellant it was shown that the Appellate Court had disagreed with the appreciation of evidence by the Trial Court and the conclusion of facts and circumstances recorded by it.

Does the decision in Krishna Govind Patii (supra)- take a different view? It is true that the attention of the Bench which disposed of Brathi's case was not invited to this decision. But, in our opinion, this decision does not take a view inconsistent with the ratio laid down in Brathi's case. The facts reveal that Krishna Govind Patil and three others were put up for trial for the murder of one Vishwanath. They were charged under section 302/34, IPC and were also separately charged under section 302, IPC. Accused Nos. 1, 3 and 4 pleaded an alibi while accused No. 2 raised the plea of private defence. The Trial Court acquitted all the accused on the ground that the prosecution witnesses were not speaking the truth and the version of accused No. 2 was a probable one. The State appealed against the order of acquittal under section 302/34, but not against the acquit- tal under section 302, IPC. The High Court confirmed the acquittal of accused Nos. 1, 3 and 4 on the ground that the evidence regarding their participation in the commission of the crime was doubtful but convicted accused No. 2 on the ground that one or more of them might have participated in the commission of the offence. Accused No. 2, therefore, preferred an appeal to this Court and contended that when three of the four named persons were acquitted the High Court was not justified in convicting him on the basis of constructive liability. This Court held that before a Court can convict a person under section 302/34, IPC, it must record a definite finding that the said person had prior consultation with one or more other persons, named or un- named, for committing the offence. When three of the accused came to be acquitted on the ground that the evidence was not acceptable or on the ground that they were entitled to benefit of doubt, in law it meant that they did not partici- pate in the offence. It was further held that the effect of the acquittal of the three co-accused is that they did not co-jointly and with the appellant commit the murder. These observations have to be read in the context of the facts stated above. The High Court on an appreciation of the evidence, came to a definite conclusion that accused Nos. 1, 3 and 4 had not participated in the commission of the crime. On that appreciation of the evidence the High Court could not have come to the conclusion that any of those acquitted accused was privy to the crime even for the limited purpose of convicting the appellant with the aid of section 34. This again is not a case where the Appellate Court disagreed with the appreciation of evidence and reached a conclusion dif- ferent from the conclusion recorded by the Trial Court in regard to the participation of the other co-accused. This decision is also distinguishable on the same ground as this Court distinguished the other decisions in Brathi's case. We are, therefore, of the opinion that the omission to refer to this decision does not render the decision in Brathi's case per incuriam. We are, therefore, in respectful agreement with the law explained in Brathi's case.

Coming now to the facts of this case the Trial Court acquit- ted the co-accused but convicted the appellant under section 302, IPC. The High Court has confirmed that conviction. Mr. Lalit is right when he says that the prosecution evidence does not disclose that the fatal blow which caused injury No. 1 was given by the appellant. Inherent of this submission is the assumption that the fatal blow was given by someone else. That establishes the fact that more that one person partici- pated in the commission of the crime. We have also on an independent appreciation of the evidence of the three eye witnesses, namely, PW 1 Komal Chand, PW 3 Kishan Lal and PW 4 Ramesh, come to the conclusion that several persons had participated in the commission of the crime. The failure on the part of the prosecution witnesses PWs 3 and 4 to identi- fy the others does not alter the situation. We are, on the other hand, convinced from the evidence of PW 1 Komal Chand that some of the co-accused, particularly, Gunda, Parsu and Gopal had participated in the commission of the crime. It is another matter that in the absence of a State appeal the High Court could not, nor can we, interfere with their acquittal, but as rightly'pointed in Brathi's case this Court is not bound by the facts found proved on the appreci- ation of evidence by the courts below and is, in law, enti- tled to reach its own conclusion different from the one recorded by the court's below on a review of the evidence. In that view of the matter we think that the conviction of the appellant can be sustained with the aid of section 34 or 149, IPC, as the case may be. In the present case we feel it safe to confirm the conviction of the appellant with the aid of section 34, IPC. We, therefore, cannot agree with the submission of the learned counsel for the appellant that at best the conviction can be recorded under section 324, IPC. We confirm the conviction of the appellant under section 302, IPC, with the aid of section 34 and maintain the sen- tence awarded to him.

For the above reasons we see no merit in this appeal and dismiss the same.

N.P.V.					       Appeal	dis-
missed.




================================================================================


================================================================================
CASE 7:
[Cites 21, Cited by 968]
Supreme Court of India
Trimukh Maroti Kirkan vs State Of Maharashtra on 11 October, 2006
Equivalent citations: 2006 AIR SCW 5300, 2006 (10) SCC 681, 2007 (1) AIR BOM R 357, 2007 (1) AIR JHAR R 364, (2007) 1 HINDULR 219, (2006) 8 SCJ 821, (2006) 8 SUPREME 58, (2006) 2 ALD(CRL) 872, (2006) 47 ALLINDCAS 47 (SC), (2007) 1 GCD 227 (SC), (2007) 1 JCR 293 (SC), (2006) 4 KER LT 638, (2006) 4 CURCRIR 169, 2007 CRILR(SC MAH GUJ) 9, (2006) 3 ALLCRIR 3150, (2007) 1 BOMCR(CRI) 104, 2007 CRILR(SC&MP) 9, (2006) 2 DMC 757, (2010) 1 MARRILJ 500, (2007) 36 OCR 21, (2007) 1 EASTCRIC 4, (2006) 10 SCALE 190, 2006 ALLMR(CRI) 3510, (2007) 57 ALLCRIC 938, (2007) 1 ALLCRILR 514, (2006) 4 CRIMES 212, (2007) 1 ANDHLT(CRI) 84, 2007 (1) SCC (CRI) 80
Author: G. P. Mathur
Bench: G.P. Mathur, R.V. Raveendran
           CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.)  1341 of 2005

PETITIONER:
Trimukh Maroti Kirkan	 		   	

RESPONDENT:
State of Maharashtra  			 	

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 11/10/2006

BENCH:
G.P. Mathur & R.V.  Raveendran

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T G. P. MATHUR, J.

1. Trimukh Maroti Kirkan has filed this appeal against the judgment and order dated 27.7.2005 of Aurangabad Bench of Bombay High Court by which the appeal filed by State of Maharashtra was allowed and the order dated 21.4.1997 passed by the learned Additional Sessions Judge, Nanded was set aside and the appellant was convicted under Section 302 IPC and was sentenced to imprisonment for life and a fine of Rs.2,000/- and in default to undergo six months RI. By the same judgment and order, the appeal filed by the appellant challenging his conviction under Section 498-A IPC and the sentence of two years RI and a fine of Rs.1,000/- and in default to undergo RI for three months was dismissed.

2. The case of the prosecution, in brief, is that the deceased Revata @ Tai daughter of Dattarao resident of village Umatwadi was married to the appellant Trimukh Maroti Kirkan (for short 'Trimukh') nearly seven years before the incident which took place on 4.11.1996 in village Kikki. Maroti Kamaji Kirkan (for short 'Maroti') is the father and Nilawatibai Maroti Kirkan (for short 'Nilawati') is the mother of the appellant Trimukh and they are residents of village Kikki. The appellant who is the husband and Maroti and Nilawati used to ill-treat the deceased Revata and used to harass her on account of non- payment of Rs.25,000/- by her parents for the purpose of purchasing a tempo for the appellant. Whenever, the deceased Revata came to her parental home, she used to disclose to her family members the ill- treatment and harassment meted out to her. She came to her parental home at the time of Panchami festival in the year 1996 and stayed there for about 15 days. During this period also she disclosed that on account of non-fulfilment of demand of Rs.25,000/- by her father, the appellant and her in-laws (Maroti and Nilawati) used to harass her. She was often beaten and was not provided food. After the Panchami festival, the father of Revata took her to the appellant's house in village Kikki and requested the appellant and her in-laws not to ill- treat her. He, however, told them that he is not in a position to fulfil their demand of Rs.25,000/- on account of his weak financial condition. A few months thereafter, Dattarao received information from a person of village Kikki that Revata had died due to snake bite. Information was also given by the Police Patil of the village to P.S. Nanded (Rural) that Revata had died due to snake bite and on the basis of this information, a case as A.D. No.42 of 1996 was registered in accordance with Section 174 Cr.P.C. at the police station. Devichand, ASI and some police personnel went to the village, held inquest over the dead body and after preparing the spot panchnama sent the same for post-mortem examination. The appellant Trimukh himself showed the place of incident where the victim had been allegedly bitten by snake and had died. The post-mortem examination conducted on the body of Revata disclosed that she had died due to asphyxia as a result of compression of neck. Dattarao, father of the deceased then lodged an FIR of the incident at 4.30 p.m. on 5.11.1990 at the police station and a case was then registered under Section 302 IPC. During the course of investigation, the police recorded statements of some witnesses. The appellant was arrested and while in custody he made a disclosure statement on the basis of which some recoveries were made. After completion of investigation, chargesheet was submitted against three persons, viz., the appellant Trimukh and his parents, viz., Maroti and Nilawati.

3. The learned Sessions Judge, Nanded framed charges under Section 498-A IPC against all the three accused and also under Section 302 IPC against appellant Trimukh. The accused pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried. In order to establish its case the prosecution examined 14 witnesses and filed some documentary evidence. The accused in their statement denied the prosecution case and stated that Revata had died on account of snake bite. The learned Sessions Judge convicted all the three accused under Section 498-A read with Section 34 IPC and sentenced them to two years RI and a fine of Rs.1,000/- and in default to undergo RI for three months. The appellant was, however, acquitted of the charge under Section 302 IPC. All the three accused preferred Criminal Appeal No.158 of 1997 before the High Court challenging their conviction and sentence under Section 498-A IPC read with Section 34 IPC while the State of Maharahstra preferred Criminal Appeal No.220 of 1997 challenging the acquittal of Trimukh under Section 302 IPC. The High Court allowed the appeal preferred by Maroti and Nilawati accused and their conviction under Section 498-A IPC was set aside and the appeal preferred by the appellant was dismissed. The appeal preferred by the State of Maharashtra was allowed and the appellant was convicted under Section 302 IPC and was sentenced to imprisonment for life and a fine of Rs.2,000/- and in default to further undergo six months RI. Both the sentences were ordered to run concurrently.

4. Since the present appeal has been filed under Section 2(a) of the Supreme Court (Enlargement of Criminal Appellate Jurisdiction) Act, 1970 and the High Court has reversed the order of acquittal and has convicted the appellant under Section 302 IPC, it will be appropriate to briefly consider the evidence on record. PW1. Dattarao is the father and PW.2 Rukmabai is the mother of the deceased Revata and they are residents of village Umatwadi. Both of them have deposed that the marriage of the deceased with the appellant took place nearly 7 years back in which they had given Rs.20,000/- in cash besides clothes and utensils. Whenever deceased came to her parental home, she used to complain that she was being harassed and ill-treated on account of demand of money. They have further deposed that last time the deceased came to their house on the occasion of Panchami festival when she told them that the appellant wanted to purchase a tempo and, therefore, her in-laws and also the appellant were asking her to get Rs.25,000/- from her parents. The deceased also informed that occasionally she was not provided food and was beaten on account of non-fulfillment of the demand of Rs.25,000/-. They have further deposed that the deceased stayed with them for about 15 days and thereafter PW.1 Dattarao escorted her to her matrimonial home and informed her in-laws that he was not in a position to give Rs.25,000/- and further requested them not to ill-treat her. A few days before the Diwali festival a person came from village Kikki and informed that Revata had died on account of snake bite. Thereafter, PW.1, PW.2 and their sons and two daughters-in-law went to village Kikki which is about 25 kilometers from their village Umatwadi. On reaching there they saw that the body of Revata had been placed in a sitting posture with her back resting on the wall and a strip of cloth had been tied along her mouth. PW.1 has further deposed that subsequently he lodged an FIR on 5.11.1996 at the police station. Though a suggestion was given to both the witnesses that the marriage of the deceased had taken place about 10 years back, but both of them specifically denied and stated that the marriage had taken place 5-6 years back. PW.1 has further deposed that he removed the cloth which was tied along the mouth of the deceased and noticed marks of injury around the neck and cheek and there were no bangles on her hands. PW.3 Balasaheb, who is cousin of PW.1 and is resident of village Umatwadi, has deposed that whenever Revata came to her parental home, she always came to his house as well. She used to narrate about the ill-treatment meted out to her by the appellant and her in-laws as they were demanding an amount of Rs.25,000/- for purchasing a tempo for the appellant. He has further deposed that in the evening of 4.11.1996 two persons from village Kikki came to his village and informed PW.1 and others that Revata had died on account of snake bite. The witness has further deposed that next day in the morning he went to village Kikki along with several other persons of his village and saw the body of the deceased. There were injury marks around the neck, cheek, hand and other parts of the body. PW.4 Chander is another cousin of PW.1 and is resident of the same village Umatwadi. His statement is almost similar to that of PW.3 Balasaheb. PW.5 Girjabai is a resident of village Kikki and her house is very close to the house of the accused in the same village. She has deposed that the deceased Revata used to visit her and she had often told her that on account of non-fulfilment of demand of money by her parents, she was being ill-treated by her in-laws and husband (appellant). She has further deposed that she used to console the deceased and tell her that the ill-treatment being meted out to her would gradually stop. She has further stated that at about 3-3.15 p.m. on the date of the incident she was informed that Maroti's daughter- in-law had died due to snake bite. She immediately rushed to the house of Maroti and saw the body of the deceased. There were marks of injury on the neck and cheek and there were no bangles on her hands. This witness is no doubt distantly related to the deceased as her husband's mother is sister of PW.2 but nothing material has come out in her cross-examination which may discredit her testimony regarding the demand of Rs.25,000/- by the appellant and his parents and also the ill-treatment being meted out to the deceased. It was suggested to her in her cross-examination that the deceased was suffering from T.B. and asthma and also that she used to have occasional chest pain but it was emphatically denied by her.

5. PW.8 Madhvrao is the real brother of accused Maroti and the appellant is his nephew. In his examination-in-chief he stated that he did not know how Revata had died and he had not witnessed any incident. The witness was declared as hostile and in his cross- examination by State counsel he admitted that the appellant Trimukh used to ply a tempo. PW.6 Maroti son of Ramrao Telange and PW.7 Venkat, both residents of village Kikki, have deposed that while in the custody of the police the appellant said that he would show the spot where the incident had taken place. Thereafter he had taken the police party and the witnesses to the field of his father Maroti and on his pointing out a pair of ladies chappal, broken pieces of bangles and a sickle lying there were recovered and the appellant had further said that the ladies chappal belonged to his wife. The aforesaid articles were taken into possession by the Police Inspector and a panchnama was prepared which was signed by them. PW.7 has further deposed that on the pointing out of the appellant his shoe was recovered which was taken in possession by the police and panchnama was drawn on which he has put his signature. PW.9 Digamber who was a witness of inquest turned hostile, but in his cross-examination he stated that he went to the house of accused Maroti at about 9.00 a.m. and had seen the body of the deceased with a piece of cloth tied around her mouth. He further admitted that when the police was recording the panchnama, he had said that there was no mark of snake bite on the body of the deceased and that he had put his signature on the inquest panchnama. PW.11 Vilas and PW.12 Nilawati whose agricultural land is situate near the agricultural land of Maroti accused turned hostile. PW.13 Digamber son of Madhavrao who is also a resident of village Kikki, also turned hostile. However, he admitted that he had heard that Revata had died due to snake bite and further that a tempo is owned by Maroti which is plied by the appellant Trimukh.

6. PW.14 Devichand, Assistant Sub Inspector of Police, P.S. Nanded (Rural) has deposed that on the basis of the information given by the Police Patil, an Accidental Death Case was registered at 12.30 p.m. on 5.11.1996 at the police station and he was entrusted with the inquiry of the same. He came to the village Kikki, held inquest on the body of the deceased and sent the same for post-mortem examination. He had prepared the panchnama which was signed by the witnesses. After the report of the post-mortem examination had been received and the FIR had been lodged by PW.1 Dattarao at 4.30 p.m. on 5.1.1996, a case was registered under Section 302 IPC. He had arrested the appellant and while he was in custody some recoveries were made regarding which a panchnama was prepared and was signed by the witnesses. He has further deposed that he asked the appellant Trimukh as to how the incident took place and then he had shown the scene of offence in a field and on his pointing out he had recovered a pair of ladies chappal, pieces of bangles and a sickle from the spot. In his cross-examination PW.14 has stated that when he had reached the hose of accused Maroti in village Kikki after registration of an Accidental Death Case, he had found the body of the deceased inside a room in a sitting posture with her back taking support from the wall.

7. PW.10 Dr. Hanumant Vasantrao Godbole conducted post- mortem examination on the body of the deceased Revata between 2.00 p.m. to 2.30 p.m. on 5.11.1996 and found the following ante mortem injuries on her person :-

1. Swelling of left cheek seen (contusion). Abrasion of about 1.5 c.m. diameter seen over left cheek, lower aspect near angle of mandible, reddish.
2. Abrasion of 1.5 x 1 c.m. over right zygomatic region of face reddish.
3. Five abrasions over left shoulder over superior and middle aspect, size ranging from 0.5 x 1.5 x .5-1 c.m.
reddish.

4. Contusion over chin, inferior aspect, 4 x 3 c.m. reddish- bluish.

5. Abrasion over right shoulder, medial most aspect, 2 x 1 c.m. reddish.

6. Contusion over cheek (left) lateral to chin, 2 x 2 c.m., reddish bluish.

7. Abrasion over left side of neck, upper most aspect, 3 c.m. medial and just above in relation with injury no.1 in this column, reddish, 1 x 0.5 c.m.

8. Abrasion over right shoulder, 1.5 c.m. posterior to injury no.5, 3 x 2 c.m. reddish.

9. Irregular large abrasion over neck, anteriorly involving upper and lower aspect, and extending to right side, reddish graze-type, on lower aspect involving sternoclavicular joints, upper aspect anteriorly (in the middle) from above thyrid cartilage. Dimension 7 c.m. near thyrid cartilage, about 4.5 c.m. below thyrid cartilage, maximum width over lower most aspect of neck, near sternoclavicular joints. At few places abrasion, dark brown colour, intermingled with reddish areas. (Suggestive of multiple irregular abrasion intermingling with each other).

The internal examination revealed the following injuries :-

(1) Contusion under scalp left temporal area, 4 x 4 c.m.
reddish, swollen, (2) mid occipital areas 7 x 5 c.m., reddish swollen. On dissection of neck, about whole of the anterior and lateral aspect of neck (structures i.e. subcutaneous tissue muscles) showed infiltration of blood (ecchymosed). Ecchymoses also seen at sternoclavicular joint, upper part of sternum. No evidence of fracture of hyoid bone/thyrid cartilage or ribs. Lymps nodes in neck region-congested. Thyroid cartilage and trachea showed reddish patches of haemorrhage externally and on opening.

The witness has opined that the death was caused due to asphyxia as a result of compression of neck. He deposed that the general and specific chemical testing did not reveal any poison and had there been a snake bite then poison would have appeared in the blood. He further deposed that the injuries present on the neck of the deceased could be caused if the throat is pressed with a shoe with force and the victim is pulled at the opposite direction by holding her hands.

8. The accused did not examine any witness in their defence. Maroti accused admitted in reply to question no.14 that the dead body was kept resting in sitting position and a strip of cloth was tied to the mouth.

9. From the evidence adduced by the prosecution the following circumstances are clearly established.

I. The marriage of Revata with the appellant Trimukh had taken place about 5-6 years back.

II. The appellant Trimukh used to ply a tempo.

III. There was a demand of Rs.25,000/- by the appellant and his parents from the parents of the deceased. The deceased was being ill-treated and was occasionally not given food on account of the fact that the demand of money had not been met.

IV. The deceased had told her parents about the fact that she was being ill-treated and occasionally she was not given food, whenever she visited her parental home and last time on the occasion of Panchami festival. She had also told about the said fact to her neighbour PW.5 Girjabai of village Kikki.

V. After the death of Revata the appellant and his parents informed some persons in the village as also the family members of the deceased that she had died on account of snake bite.

VI. When PW.1, PW.2, PW.3 and PW.4 reached the house of the accused in village Kikki, they found the body of the deceased in a sitting posture with her back taking support from the wall. PW.14 Devichand, Assistant Sub-Inspector of Police also found the body in the same position.

VII. The post-mortem examination revealed that Revata had died due to asphyxia as a result of strangulation and not on account of snake bite.

VIII. Certain recoveries like chappal of the deceased, broken pieces of bangles were made at the pointing out of the appellant. A shoe was also recovered at his pointing out.

10. In the case in hand there is no eye-witness of the occurrence and the case of the prosecution rests on circumstantial evidence. The normal principle in a case based on circumstantial evidence is that the circumstances from which an inference of guilt is sought to be drawn must be cogently and firmly established; that those circumstances should be of a definite tendency unerringly pointing towards the guilt of the accused; that the circumstances taken cumulatively should form a chain so complete that there is no escape from the conclusion that within all human probability the crime was committed by the accused and they should be incapable of explanation on any hypothesis other than that of the guilt of the accused and inconsistent with his innocence.

11. The demand for dowry or money from the parents of the bride has shown a phenomenal increase in last few years. Cases are frequently coming before the Courts, where the husband or in-laws have gone to the extent of killing the bride if the demand is not met. These crimes are generally committed in complete secrecy inside the house and it becomes very difficult for the prosecution to lead evidence. No member of the family, even if he is a witness of the crime, would come forward to depose against another family member. The neighbours, whose evidence may be of some assistance, are generally reluctant to depose in Court as they want to keep aloof and do not want to antagonize a neighbourhood family. The parents or other family members of the bride being away from the scene of commission of crime are not in a position to give direct evidence which may inculpate the real accused except regarding the demand of money or dowry and harassment caused to the bride. But, it does not mean that a crime committed in secrecy or inside the house should go unpunished.

12. If an offence takes place inside the privacy of a house and in such circumstances where the assailants have all the opportunity to plan and commit the offence at the time and in circumstances of their choice, it will be extremely difficult for the prosecution to lead evidence to establish the guilt of the accused if the strict principle of circumstantial evidence, as noticed above, is insisted upon by the Courts. A Judge does not preside over a criminal trial merely to see that no innocent man is punished. A Judge also presides to see that a guilty man does not escape. Both are public duties. (See Stirland v. Director of Public Prosecution 1944 AC 315  quoted with approval by Arijit Pasayat, J. in State of Punjab vs. Karnail Singh (2003) 11 SCC 271). The law does not enjoin a duty on the prosecution to lead evidence of such character which is almost impossible to be led or at any rate extremely difficult to be led. The duty on the prosecution is to lead such evidence which it is capable of leading, having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case. Here it is necessary to keep in mind Section 106 of the Evidence Act which says that when any fact is especially within the knowledge of any person, the burden of proving that fact is upon him. Illustration (b) appended to this section throws some light on the content and scope of this provision and it reads:

(b) A is charged with traveling on a railway without ticket. The burden of proving that he had a ticket is on him."
Where an offence like murder is committed in secrecy inside a house, the initial burden to establish the case would undoubtedly be upon the prosecution, but the nature and amount of evidence to be led by it to establish the charge cannot be of the same degree as is required in other cases of circumstantial evidence. The burden would be of a comparatively lighter character. In view of Section 106 of the Evidence Act there will be a corresponding burden on the inmates of the house to give a cogent explanation as to how the crime was committed. The inmates of the house cannot get away by simply keeping quiet and offering no explanation on the supposed premise that the burden to establish its case lies entirely upon the prosecution and there is no duty at all on an accused to offer any explanation.

13. A somewhat similar question was examined by this Court in connection with Section 167 and 178-A of the Sea Customs Act in Collector of Customs, Madras & Ors. v. D. Bhoormull AIR 1974 SC 859 and it will be apt to reproduce paras 30 to 32 of the reports which are as under :

30. It cannot be disputed that in proceedings for imposing penalties under Clause (8) of Section 167 to which Section 178-A does not apply, the burden of proving that the goods are smuggled goods, is on the Department.
This is a fundamental rule relating to proof in all criminal or quasi-criminal proceedings, where there is no statutory provision to the contrary. But in appreciating its scope and the nature of the onus cast by it, we must pay due regard to other kindred principles, no less fundamental, of universal application. One of them is that the prosecution or the Department is not required to prove its case with mathematical precision to a demonstrable degree; for, in all human affairs absolute certainty is a myth, and as Prof. Brett felicitously puts it - ''all exactness is a fake". El Dorado of absolute proof being unattainable, the law, accepts for it, probability as a working substitute in this work-a-day world. The law does not require the prosecution to prove the impossible. All that it requires is the establishment of such a degree of probability that a prudent man may, on its basis, believe in the existence of the fact in issue. Thus, legal proof is not necessarily perfect proof; often it is nothing more than a prudent man's estimate as to the probabilities of the case.

31. The other cardinal principle having an important bearing on the incidence of burden of proof is that sufficiency and weight of the evidence is to be considered - to use the words of Lord Mansfield in Blatch v. Archer (1774) 1 Cowp. 63 at p.65 "according to the proof which it was in the power of one side to prove, and in the power of the other to have contradicted". Since it is exceedingly difficult, if not absolutely impossible for the prosecution to prove facts which are especially within the knowledge of the opponent or the accused, it is not obliged to prove them as part of its primary burden.

32. Smuggling is clandestine conveying of goods to avoid legal duties. Secrecy and stealth being its covering guards, it is impossible for the Preventive Department to unravel every link of the process. Many facts relating to this illicit business remain in the special or peculiar knowledge of the person concerned in it. On the principle underlying Section 106, Evidence Act, the burden to establish those facts is cast on the person concerned; and if he falls to establish or explain those facts, an adverse inference of facts may arise against him, which coupled with the presumptive evidence adduced by the prosecution or the Department would rebut the initial presumption of innocence in favour of that person, and in the result prove him guilty. As pointed out by Best in 'Law of Evidence', (12th Edn. Article 320, page 291), the "presumption of innocence is, no doubt, presumptio juris; but every day's practice shows that it may be successfully encountered by the presumption of guilt arising from the recent (unexplained) possession of stolen property", though the latter is only a presumption of fact. Thus the burden on the prosecution or the Department may be considerably lightened even by such presumption of fact arising in their favour. However, this does not mean that the special or peculiar knowledge of the person proceeded against will relieve the prosecution or the Department altogether of the burden of producing some evidence in respect of that fact in issue. It will only alleviate that burden to discharge which very slight evidence may suffice.

(Emphasis supplied) The aforesaid principle has been approved and followed in Balram Prasad Agrawal v. State of Bihar & Ors. AIR 1997 SC 1830 where a married woman had committed suicide on account of ill- treatment meted out to her by her husband and in-laws on account of demand of dowry and being issueless.

14. The question of burden of proof where some facts are within the personal knowledge of the accused was examined in State of West Bengal v. Mir Mohammad Omar & Ors. (2000) 8 SCC 382. In this case the assailants forcibly dragged the deceased Mahesh from the house where he was taking shelter on account of the fear of the accused and took him away at about 2.30 in the night. Next day in the morning his mangled body was found lying in the hospital. The trial Court convicted the accused under Section 364 read with Section 34 IPC and sentenced them to 10 years RI. The accused preferred an appeal against their conviction before the High Court and the State also filed an appeal challenging the acquittal of the accused for murder charge. The accused had not given any explanation as to what happened to Mahesh after he was abducted by them. The learned Sessions Judge after referring to the law on circumstantial evidence had observed that there was a missing link in the chain of evidence after the deceased was last seen together with the accused persons and the discovery of the dead body in the hospital and had concluded that the prosecution had failed to establish the charge of murder against the accused persons beyond any reasonable doubt. This Court took note of the provisions of Section 106 of the Evidence Act and laid down the following principle in paras 31 to 34 of the reports :

"31. The pristine rule that the burden of proof is on the prosecution to prove the guilt of the accused should not be taken as a fossilised doctrine as though it admits no process of intelligent reasoning. The doctrine of presumption is not alien to the above rule, nor would it impair the temper of the rule. On the other hand, if the traditional rule relating to burden of proof of the prosecution is allowed to be wrapped in pedantic coverage, the offenders in serious offences would be the major beneficiaries and the society would be the casualty.
32. In this case, when the prosecution succeeded in establishing the afore-narrated circumstances, the court has to presume the existence of certain facts. Presumption is a course recognised by the law for the court to rely on in conditions such as this.
33. Presumption of fact is an inference as to the existence of one fact from the existence of some other facts, unless the truth of such inference is disproved. Presumption of fact is a rule in law of evidence that a fact otherwise doubtful may be inferred from certain other proved facts. When inferring the existence of a fact from other set of proved facts, the court exercises a process of reasoning and reaches a logical conclusion as the most probable position. The above principle has gained legislative recognition in India when Section 114 is incorporated in the Evidence Act. It empowers the court to presume the existence of any fact which it thinks likely to have happened. In that process the court shall have regard to the common course of natural events, human conduct etc. in relation to the facts of the case.
34. When it is proved to the satisfaction of the court that Mahesh was abducted by the accused and they took him out of that area, the accused alone knew what happened to him until he was with them. If he was found murdered within a short time after the abduction the permitted reasoning process would enable the court to draw the presumption that the accused have murdered him. Such inference can be disrupted if the accused would tell the court what else happened to Mahesh at least until he was in their custody."
Applying the aforesaid principle, this Court while maintaining the conviction under Section 364 read with Section 34 IPC reversed the order of acquittal under Section 302 read with Section 34 IPC and convicted the accused under the said provision and sentenced them to imprisonment for life.

15. In Ram Gulam Chaudhary & Ors. v. Sate of Bihar (2001) 8 SCC 311, the accused after brutally assaulting a boy carried him away and thereafter the boy was not seen alive nor his body was found. The accused, however, offered no explanation as to what they did after they took away the boy. It was held that for the absence of any explanation from the side of the accused about the boy, there was every justification for drawing an inference that they have murdered the boy. It was further observed that even though Section 106 of the Evidence Act may not be intended to relieve the prosecution of its burden to prove the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt, but the section would apply to cases like the present, where the prosecution has succeeded in proving facts from which a reasonable inference can be drawn regarding death. The accused by virtue of their special knowledge must offer an explanation which might lead the Court to draw a different inference.

16. In a case based on circumstantial evidence where no eye- witness account is available, there is another principle of law which must be kept in mind. The principle is that when an incriminating circumstance is put to the accused and the said accused either offers no explanation or offers an explanation which is found to be untrue, then the same becomes an additional link in the chain of circumstances to make it complete. This view has been taken in a catena of decisions of this Court. [See State of Tamil Nadu v. Rajendran (1999) 8 SCC 679 (para 6); State of U.P. v. Dr. Ravindra Prakash Mittal AIR 1992 SC 2045 (para 40); State of Maharashtra v. Suresh (2000) 1 SCC 471 (para 27); Ganesh Lal v. State of Rajasthan (2002) 1 SCC 731 (para 15) and Gulab Chand v. State of M.P. (1995) 3 SCC 574 (para 4)].

17. Where an accused is alleged to have committed the murder of his wife and the prosecution succeeds in leading evidence to show that shortly before the commission of crime they were seen together or the offence takes placed in the dwelling home where the husband also normally resided, it has been consistently held that if the accused does not offer any explanation how the wife received injuries or offers an explanation which is found to be false, it is a strong circumstance which indicates that he is responsible for commission of the crime. In Nika Ram v. State of Himachal Pradesh AIR 1972 SC 2077 it was observed that the fact that the accused alone was with his wife in the house when she was murdered there with 'khokhri' and the fact that the relations of the accused with her were strained would, in the absence of any cogent explanation by him, point to his guilt. In Ganeshlal v. State of Maharashtra (1992) 3 SCC 106 the appellant was prosecuted for the murder of his wife which took place inside his house. It was observed that when the death had occurred in his custody, the appellant is under an obligation to give a plausible explanation for the cause of her death in his statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C. The mere denial of the prosecution case coupled with absence of any explanation were held to be inconsistent with the innocence of the accused, but consistent with the hypothesis that the appellant is a prime accused in the commission of murder of his wife. In State of U.P. v. Dr. Ravindra Prakash Mittal AIR 1992 SC 2045 the medical evidence disclosed that the wife died of strangulation during late night hours or early morning and her body was set on fire after sprinkling kerosene. The defence of the husband was that wife had committed suicide by burning herself and that he was not at home at that time. The letters written by the wife to her relatives showed that the husband ill-treated her and their relations were strained and further the evidence showed that both of them were in one room in the night. It was held that the chain of circumstances was complete and it was the husband who committed the murder of his wife by strangulation and accordingly this Court reversed the judgment of the High Court acquitting the accused and convicted him under Section 302 IPC. In State of Tamil Nadu v. Rajendran (1999) 8 SCC 679 the wife was found dead in a hut which had caught fire. The evidence showed that the accused and his wife were seen together in the hut at about 9.00 p.m. and the accused came out in the morning through the roof when the hut had caught fire. His explanation was that it was a case of accidental fire which resulted in the death of his wife and a daughter. The medical evidence showed that the wife died due to asphyxia as a result of strangulation and not on account of burn injuries. It was held that there cannot be any hesitation to come to the conclusion that it was the accused (husband) who was the perpetrator of the crime.

18. In the earlier part of the judgment we have given a resume of the evidence which is available on record. The appellant was plying a tempo in order to earn his livelihood. It is fully established that the deceased Revata was being ill-treated and harassed on account of non- fulfilment of demand of Rs.25,000/- which the appellant wanted for purchasing a tempo. The deceased Revata was often beaten and was sometimes not given food. After Revata had been murdered, information was sent to her parents that she had died on account of snake bite, which was reiterated when they reached the house of the appellant in village Kikki. In fact, everyone in the village had been told that Revata had died on account of snake bite and the Police Patil, believing the said information to be true, had lodged an Accidental Death Report at the police station. The medical evidence, however, showed that she had died on account of asphyxia due to strangulation. The body of the deceased was purposely placed in a sitting posture with her back taking support of the wall so that no one may suspect that she had actually been killed as a result of strangulation and may believe the version of snake bite given by the appellant and his parents. The appellant in his statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C. did not offer any explanation as to how she received the injuries which were found on her body. Recovery of some articles of the deceased was made at the pointing out of the appellant. The circumstances enumerated above unerringly point to the guilt of the accused and they are inconsistent with his innocence.

19. The High Court was, therefore, perfectly right in allowing the appeal filed by the State and in convicting the appellant under Section 302 IPC and sentencing him thereunder. We, therefore, do not find any merit in the appeal, which is hereby dismissed.
================================================================================


================================================================================
CASE 8:
[Cites 17, Cited by 598]
Supreme Court of India
Subran @ Subramanian And Ors vs State Of Kerala on 24 February, 1993
Equivalent citations: 1993 SCR (2) 84, 1993 SCC (3) 32, 1993 AIR SCW 1014, 1993 (3) SCC 32, 1993 CRI. L. J. 1387, (1993) 2 SCR 84 (SC), 1993 ALLAPPCAS (CRI) 164, 1993 (2) SCR 84, 1993 (2) CRIMES 15, (1993) IJR 137 (SC), 1993 (2) CHANDCRIC 178, 1993 (1) CURCRIR 83, 1993 (1) UJ (SC) 478, 1993 CRIAPPR(SC) 164, 1993 SCC(CRI) 583, 1993 BBCJ 108, (1993) SC CR R 487, (1993) MAD LJ(CRI) 538, (1993) 2 RECCRIR 70, (1993) 2 SCJ 124, (1993) 1 CURCRIR 83, (1993) ALLCRIC 350, (1993) 2 CHANDCRIC 178, (1993) 1 ALLCRILR 728, (1993) 2 CRIMES 15
Author: B.P. Jeevan Reddy
Bench: B.P. Jeevan Reddy
           PETITIONER:
SUBRAN @ SUBRAMANIAN AND ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF KERALA

DATE OF JUDGMENT24/02/1993

BENCH:
ANAND, A.S. (J)
BENCH:
ANAND, A.S. (J)
VENKATACHALLIAH, M.N.(CJ)
JEEVAN REDDY, B.P. (J)

CITATION:
 1993 SCR  (2)	84	  1993 SCC  (3)	 32
 JT 1993 (2)   194	  1993 SCALE  (1)685


ACT:
Indian Penal Code, 1860:
Sections 141, 149, 299, 300, 302 and 326-Unlawful  assembly-
What  is-Six accused charged with offences under section 302
read  with  section 149-Two acquitted-Effect  of-Held  other
four  being less than five would not be members of  unlawful
assembly-Where	Existence  of unlawful assembly	 not  proved
conviction  with  aid  of section 149  cannot  be  recorded-
Accused	 cannot	 be  convicted for offence  with  which	 not
charged-Accused liable for offences committed individually.



HEADNOTE:
Six accused persons were arrayed by the investigating agency
for  offences punishable under Sections 302, 324, 323,	341,
148  read with Section 149 IPC, for an occurrence that	took
place on 24th December, 1986 in which one Suku succumbed  to
injuries  as a result of the assault during the	 occurrence.
They  were  put	 on trial, and	the  prosecution  sought  to
establish its case by examining as many as six eye-witnesses
besides other evidence, documentary and oral.
According  to  the  prosecution case, all  the	six  accused
persons	 were  armed with weapons like	chopper,  iron	rod,
knife, cycle chain and torches and that the accused had held
PW.2  George  and while the first accused  kicked  him,	 the
third accused inflicted injuries on him with a cycle  chain.
So  far	 as  Suku deceased was concerned,  all	the  accused
except the first accused caused him injuries with a torch, a
cycle  chain and a knife.  The first accused was alleged  to
have  caught  hold  of	Suku by	 the  collar  and  inflicted
injuries  on his hands, arms and legs with a  chopper.	 The
assault	 took  place  in front of an arrack  shop.   It	 was
alleged	 that  enmity between the two groups on	 account  of
suspicion  of  information  being passed on  to	 the  Excise
Officials,  regarding illicit distillation was the cause  of
the  occurrence, but no evidence was led in support of	this
allegation  and	 no motive for commission of the  crime	 was
established at the trial.
85
At  the	 trial, four eye-witnesses PW3, P.W.  6,  PW.7,	 the
salesman  and  his  assistant in the arrack  shop  and	PW.8
turned	hostile	 and did not support the  prosecution  case.
The  prosecution case was sought to be proved by the  ocular
testimony of PW.4 and PW.5 both aged about 13 years, at	 the
time of the occurrence and other evidence.  Both these	eye-
witnesses supported their statements recorded under  section
161  Cr.  P.C. during their testimony in Court.	  The  trial
court on the basis of prosecution evidence found accused No.
1, Subran, guilty of an offence punishable under Section 302
IPC  and sentenced him to suffer rigorous  imprisonment	 for
life.	Accused Nos. 2 to 6, namely, Rajan, Preman,  Viswan,
Sura  and  Shajan,  were found guilty of  an  offence  under
Section	 326/149 IPC and each one of them was  sentenced  to
undergo	 rigorous  imprisonment	 for  three  years  Besides,
accused	 1 to 4 were convicted for an offence under  Section
148  and sentenced to suffer rigorous imprisonment  for	 one
year.	All  the accused were also  convicted  for  offences
under  Sections 14, 341, 323,324 read with Section  149	 IPC
but  no	 separate  sentences were awarded on  any  of  those
counts.
On  appeal  to the High Court, the conviction  and  sentence
awarded	 to  accused  1 to 3 and  5  were  confirmed,  while
accused	 4  and	 6 were acquitted  and	the  conviction	 and
sentence recorded against them by the Sessions Judge was set
aside.	 Ile participation of the 6th accused and  the	role
assigned to him by the prosecution was doubted by the Judges
of the High Court and he was given the benefit of doubt	 and
acquitted.   Similarly, the High Court disbelieved the	role
assigned  to accused No. 4 and doubted his participation  in
the commission of the crime.
]Me accused appealed to this Court by Special Leave.   After
preliminary hearing it was ordered that the appeal be  heard
on the limited question regarding the nature of the  offence
and the quantum of the sentence only.
On  the	 question : Whether after the acquittal of  the	 two
accused,  could the High Court Convict appellant No.  1	 for
the  substantive offence under Section 302 IPC	 an  offence
with  which he had not been charged, and appellants 2  to  4
for an offence under section 326/149 IPC,
Partially allowing the appeal, the Court,
HELD:	  1.  A combined reading of Section 141 and  Section
149 IPC
86
show  that an assembly of less than five members is  not  an
unlawful  assembly  within the meaning of  Section  141	 and
cannot,	 therefore,  form the basis for	 conviction  for  an
offence with the aid of Section 149 IPC. [92F]
2.   The  existence of an unlawful assembly is	a  necessary
postulate for invoking Section 149 IPC.	 Where the existence
of  such an unlawful assembly is not proved, the  conviction
with  the  aid	of Sections 149 IPC cannot  be	recorded  or
sustained.  The failure of the prosecution to show that	 the
assembly was unlawful must necessarily result in the failure
of the charge under section 149 )PC. [92H,93A]
3.   A	person charged for an offence under Section 302	 IPC
read with Section 149 cannot be convicted of the substantive
offence	 under	Section 302 IPC without	 a  specific  charge
having	been  framed  against  him  as	envisaged  by	law.
Conviction  for	 the substantive offence in such a  case  is
unjustified  because  an  accused might	 be  misled  in	 his
defence	 by  the absence of the charge for  the	 substantive
offence under Section 302 IPC. [93D]
4.   The  conviction  of appellants 2 to 4  for	 an  offence
under  Section 326/149 IPC cannot be sustained and the	same
would  be the position with regard to the conviction of	 all
the  appellants for other offences with the aid	 of  Section
149 IPC also. [93B]
5.   The  High Court failed to draw the distinction  between
an  offence under clause (b) and (c) of Section 299 IPC	 and
the one failing under clause (3) of Section 300 IPC. [93G]
6, The effect of the acquittal of the two accused persons by
the High Court and without the High Court finding that	some
other  known  or unknown persons were also involved  in	 the
assault,  would be that for all intent and purposes the	 two
acquitted  accused persons were not members of the  unlawful
assembly.   Thus,  only four accused could be said  to	have
been the members of the assembly but such an assembly  which
comprises  of  less  than five members is  not	an  unlawful
assembly within the meaning of Section 141 IPC. [92G]
7.   Appellant No. 1 Subran not having been charged for	 the
substantive  offence of murder under Section 302  IPC,	even
the  trial court, which tried the six accused  persons,	 was
not justified in recording a conviction against him for	 the
substantive offence of murder punishable under Sec-
87
tion  302  IPC after framing a charge against  him  for	 the
offence	 under Section 302 read with Section 149  IPC  only.
[93C]
8.   Appellant No. 1, Subran, was never called upon to	meet
a  charge under Section 302 IPC simplicitor and,  therefore,
in defending himself, he can not be said to have been called
upon  to  meet	that  charge and he  could  very  well	have
considered it unnecessary to concentrate on that part of the
prosecution   case  during  the	 cross-examination  of	 the
prosecution  witnesses.	  Therefore, the conviction  of	 the
appellant  No.	1 for an offence under Section 302  was	 not
permissible. [93E]
9.   The  intention to cause murder of Suku deceased,  could
not  be	 attributed  to	 appellant No.	1  and	the  medical
evidence also shows that the injuries attributed to him were
not sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause the
death  of the deceased.	 The conviction of appellant  No.  1
for  the  substantive  offence	under  Section	302  IPC  is
therefore  unwarranted and cannot be sustained.	  That	Suku
deceased  died as a result of injuries inflicted on  him  by
all  the four appellants is not a matter which is in  doubt.
From the ocular evidence read with the medical evidence,  it
stands	established  that the injuries on the  deceased	 had
been caused by all the four appellants and that the death of
Suku  had occurred due to the receipt of multiple  injuries.
[93H, 94A-B]
10.  On	 a consideration of the circumstances of  the  case,
the  type of weapons with which the accused were  armed	 and
the  nature and seat of the injuries, it is not possible  to
hold  that  all the four appellants had	 shared	 the  common
intention of causing such bodily injuries on the deceased as
were likely to cause the death of Suku or were sufficient in
the  ordinary  course  of nature to cause  his	death.	 The
appellants  would,  therefore  be  liable  for	the  offence
committed individually by each one of them. [94D-E]
11.  The  case	of appellant No. 1 therefore,  falls  within
Section	 299 I PC punishable under Section 304	Part-1	[PC.
He  is	accordingly,  convicted for  the  said	offence	 and
sentenced  to suffer rigorous imprisonment for a  period  of
seven years and to pay a fine of Rs. 2,000 and in default of
payment	 suffer further rigorous imprisonment for one  year.
Fine  if realised to be paid to the heirs of  the  deceased.
[94G-H]
12  (a)	 With  regard to the three  other  appellants  their
conviction for
88
an offence under Section 326 with the aid of Section 149  is
not sustainable in law, it is accordingly set aside and they
are  convicted	under Section 326/149 IPC.   They  would  be
responsible for their individual acts.	The injuries  caused
by  appellants	2 and 3 were with a torch, iron	 rod  and  a
cycle chain.  None of the injuries caused by them  according
to  the	 post-mortem report were on any vital  part  of	 the
body,  though some of the injuries caused by  blunt  weapons
were grievous in nature.  Each of them are convicted for  an
offence	 under	Section	 325 IPC  and  sentenced  to  suffer
rigorous imprisonment for two years each. [95B-C]
12  (b)	 Appellant  No. 4 caused grievous  injuries  to	 the
deceased  with	a knife, the offence would  therefore,	fall
under  Section 326 IPC.	 He is therefore convicted  for	 the
said  offence and sentenced to suffer rigorous	imprisonment
for  a period of three years and to pay a fine of Rs.  500/-
and  in default of payment to suffer  rigorous	imprisonment
for  a period of three months.	The fine, if realised  shall
be paid to the heirs of the deceased.
[95D]
12 (c) The conviction of all the appellants for the  offence
under Section 324 as recorded by the High Court as also	 for
the  other  offences are maintained but without the  aid  of
Section 149 IPC. [95E]



JUDGMENT:
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 237 of 1993.

From the Judgment and Order dated 4.9.91 of the Kerala High Court in Crl. A. No. 537 of 1988.

M.M. Kashyap, Sudhir Gopi, A.G. Prasad and Roy Abraham for the Appellants.

M.T. George for the Respondent.

The Judgment of the Court was delivered by DR. ANAND, J. On 9.3.1992, when this special leave petition, directed against the judgment and order dated 4th September, 1991, of the High Court of Kerala in Criminal Appeal No. 537 of 1988, came up for preliminary hearing, the following order was made:

"Issue notice limited to the question as to the nature of offence and the quantum of sentence.
No orders on bail."
Heard learned counsel for the parties. Leave is granted confined to the limited question on which notice was issued as referred to above.

For an occurrence which took place on 24th, December 1986, in which one Suku succumbed to the injuries as a result of the assault during the occurrence, six accused persons were arrayed by the investigating agency for offences punishable under Sections 302, 324, 323, 341, 148 read with Section 149 IPC. They were put on trial and the prosecution sought to establish its case by examining as many as six eye-witnesses besides other evidence, documentary and oral. At the trial however, four eye- witnesses, PW3 Devassykutty, PWs 6 and 7 salesman and his assistant in the arrack shop and PW8 Unni @ Velayudhan turned hostile and did not support the prosecution case. The prosecution case was sought to be proved by the ocular testimony of PW4 Biju and PW5 Anil, both aged about 13 years at the time of occurrence and the other evidence. Both the eye-witnesses supported their statements recorded under Section 161 Cr. P.C. during their testimony in court. The trial court on the basis of prosecution evidence found accused No. 1, Subran, guilty of an offence punishable under Section 302 IPC and sentenced him to suffer rigorous imprisonment for life. Accused Nos. 2 to 6, namely, Rajan, Preman, Viswan, Sura and Shajan were found guilty of an offence under Section 326/149 IPC and each one of them was sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for three years. Besides, accused 1 to 4 were convicted for an offence under Section 148 and sentenced to suffer rigorous imprisonment for one year. All the accused were also convicted and sentenced to suffer rigorous imprisonment for six months each under Section 147 IPC. All the accused were also convicted for offences under Sections 143, 341, 323, 324 read with Section 149 IPC but no separate sentences were awarded on any of those counts. On an appeal before the High Court, the conviction and sentenced awarded to accused 1 to 3 and 5 were confirmed while accused 4 and 6 were acquitted and the conviction and sentence recorded against them by the learned Sessions Judge was set aside. In view of the limited notice issued by this Court, we are relieved of the necessity to reappreciate the prosecution evidence in extenso and shall therefore confine ourselves to the determination of the nature of the offence and the award of appropriate sentence to the four appellants accepting, as established the prosecution case against the four appellants beyond a reasonable doubt.

According to the prosecution case, all the six accused persons were armed with weapons like chopper, iron rod, knife, cycle chain and torches. It is the prosecution case that the accused had held PW2 George and while the first accused kicked him, the third accused inflicted injuries on him with a cycle chain. So far as Suku deceased is concerned, according to the prosecution, all the accused except the first accused caused him injuries with a torch, a cycle chain and a knife. The first accused is alleged to have caught hold of Suku by the collar and inflicted injuries on his hands arms and legs with a chopper. The assault took place in front of an arrack shop. According to the prosecution case there was enmity between the two groups on account of illicit distillation and suspicion of information being passed on to the Excise officials. However, no evidence was led in support of this allegation by the prosecution and no motive for commission of the crime was established at the trial.

The postmortem on the deceased was conducted by Dr. Sivasankara Pillai PW12. He had found as many as 38 injuries on the deceased. Most of the injuries found by him, however, were abrasions or contusions on different parts of the body though the deceased had also suffered stab wounds on the right upper arm and left forearm and sharp weapon injuries on his hands and legs. The bones of the legs and arm had been fractured. According to the medical witness, death of Suku deceased was caused due to multiple injuries. According to the medical evidence, there was no stab or incised wound inflicted on any of the vital parts of the body i.e. neck, chest or abdomen. The Doctor has opined that the deceased had died due to multiple injuries and that the injuries could have been caused by beating him with torches, knife, iron rod, cycle chain and the chopper. According to him, the cumulative effect of all the injuries, taken together, had resulted in the death of the deceased. The doctor further stated that as a result of the chemical analysis of the viscera, blood and urine, there was indication that the deceased had consumed alcohol before he had been assaulted, though he was unable to give the quality or quantity of liquor consumed by the deceased. From an analysis of the record of injuries as detailed in the post-mortem report, it transpires that there were 18 contusions of different dimensions but minor in their gravity on the body of the deceased. Eight of the injuries recorded, out of the 38 in the post mortem report., were abrasions on different parts of the body. According to the medical witness, nine out of those injuries could have been caused by a fall or the deceased coming into contact with any rough surface or area. Out of the remaining injuries, seven were chop wounds while two were stab wounds, besides three were incised injuries. it was the cumulative effect of the injuries which resulted in the death of the deceased and according to the doctor, the injuries when taken together were sufficient to cause death in the ordinary course of nature. None of the injuries by itself was found to be sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death of the deceased. According to the medical opinion about the cause of death, "deceased died due to multiple injuries".

From the above analysis of injuries, it cannot be said that any one of the four appellants, who alone stand convicted by the High Court had inflicted injuries intending to cause death or such bodily injury as is sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death. As already noticed, six accused persons had been charged by the investigating agency for offences punishable under Sections 143, 147, 148, 341, 323, 324, 326 and 302 read with Section 149 IPC and put on trial. The trial court convicted accused 2 to 6 under Section 326 IPC with the aid of Section 149 IPC. It convicted accused No. 1 for an offence under Section 302 IPC. While convicting accused 2 to 6 for the offence under Section 326/149 IPC, the trial court came to the conclusion that 'the accused did not share the common object to murder Suku and that the common object was only to cause grievous hurt' to the deceased. Being of the opinion, that accused No. 1 had caused injuries with a chopper and those injuries "could" have resulted in the death of the deceased, he was convicted for an offence under Section 302 IPC. The High Court acquitted two of the accused and convicted the remaining four only. The High Court found that clear evidence of the eye-witnesses was only against accused Nos. 2, 3 and 5 besides appellant No. 1. The participation of the 6th accused and the role assigned to him by the prosecution was doubted by the learned Judges of the High Court and he was given the benefit of doubt and acquitted. Similarly, the High Court disbelieved the role assigned to accused No. 4 and doubted his participation in the commission of the crime. He was also' given the benefit of doubt and acquitted. While setting aside the conviction and sentence of the said two accused, the High Court did not hold that beside the four accused convicted by it, there were some other known or unknown accused who had also been a party to the commission of the crime. It is in this above background that we have to consider the nature of the offence committed by the four appellants. Admittedly, none of the accused persons individually had been charged for the substantive offence of murder under Section 302 IPC. In the trial court all the six accused were charge sheeted for an offence under Section 302 read with Section 149 IPC. Other charges were also framed against the accused but only with the aid of Section 149 IPC. After the acquittal of the two accused, could the High Court convict appellant No. 1 for the substantive offence under Section 302 IPC (with which he had not been charged) and the appellants 2 to 4 for an offence under Section 326/149 IPC ?

Section 141 IPC defines an unlawful assembly to be an assembly of five or more persons, where the common object of the persons comprising that assembly is to commit any of the acts enumerated in the five clauses of that Section. Section 149 IPC reads as under:

"Sec. 149. Every member of unlawful assembly guilty of offence committed in prosecution of common object If an offence is committed by any member of an unlawful assembly in prosecution of the common object of that assembly, or such as the members of that assembly knew to be likely to be committed in prosecution of that object, every person who, at the time of the committing of that offence, is a member of the same assembly, is guilty of that offence."
A combined reading of Section 141 and Section 149 IPC (supra) show that an assembly of less than five members is not an unlawful assembly within the meaning of Section 141 and cannot, therefore, form the basis for conviction for an offence with the aid of Section 149 IPC. The effect of the acquittal of the two accused persons by the High Court and without the High Court finding that some other known or unknown persons were also involved in the assault, would be that for all intent and purposes the two acquitted accused persons were not members of the unlawful assembly. Thus, only four accused could be said to have been the members of the assembly but such an assembly which comprises of less than five members is not an unlawful assembly within the meaning of Section 141 IPC. The existence of an unlawful assembly is a necessary postulate for invoking Section 149 IPC. Where the existence of such an unlawful assembly is not proved, the conviction with the aid of Section 149 IPC cannot be recorded or sustained. The failure of the prosecution to show that the assembly was unlawful must necessarily result in the failure of the charge under Section 149 IPC. Consequently, the conviction of appellants 2 to 4 for an offence under Section 326/149 IPC cannot be sustained and the same would be the position with regard to the conviction of all the appellants for other offences with the aid of Section 149 IPC also.

Since, appellant No. 1 Subran had not been charged for the substantive offence of murder under Section 302 IPC, even the trial court, which tried the six accused persons, was not justified in recording a conviction against him for the substantive offence of murder punishable under Section 302 IPC after framing a charge against him for the offence under Section 302 read with Section 149 IPC only. A person charged for an offence under Section 302, IPC read with Section 149 cannot be convicted of the substantive offence under Section 302, IPC without a specific charge having been framed against him as envisaged by law. Conviction for the substantive: offence in such a case is unjustified because an accused might be misled in his defence by the absence of the charge for the substantive offence under Section 302 IPC. Appellant No. 1, Subran, was never called upon to meet a charge under Section 302 IPC simplicitor and, therefore, in defending himself, he can not be said to have been called upon to meet that charge and he could very well have considered it unnecessary to concentrate on that part of the prosecution case during the cross-examination of the prosecution witnesses. Therefore, the conviction of the first appellant for an offence under Section 302 was not permissible. That apart, according to the medical evidence, none of the injuries allegedly caused by this appellant was either individually or taken collectively with the other injuries caused by him, sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death of Suku. Medical evidence is clear on this aspect of the case and it is not possible to say that the injuries inflicted by the first appellant with the chopper were inflicted with the intention to cause the death of Suku. The High Court failed to draw the distinction between an offence under clause (b) and (c) of Section 299 IPC and the one falling under clause (3) of' Section 300 IPC. The intention to cause murder of Suku deceased, could not be attributed to him and the medical evidence also shows that the injuries attributed to him were not sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death of the deceased. The conviction of appellant No. 1, Subran, for the substantive offence under Section 302 IPC is therefore, unwarranted and cannot be sustained. That Suku deceased died as a result of injuries inflicted on him by all the four appellants is not a matter which is in doubt. From the ocular evidence read with the medical evidence, it stands established that the injuries on the deceased had been caused by all the four appellants and that the death of Suku had occurred due to receipt of multiple injuries. What offence can then be said to have been committed by the four appellants ?

According to the medical evidence, the injuries caused were cumulatively sufficient to cause death and the death had occurred due to multiple injuries which were found sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death. According to the ocular testimony of witnesses namely, Biju (PW4) and Anil (PW5), who have been believed by both the courts below and with which finding we have no reason to differ, all the four appellants had caused those injuries. It is, therefore, necessary in a case like this to determine as to which of the accused is guilty of a particular offence. On a consideration of the circumstances of the case, the type of weapons with which they were armed and nature and seat of the injuries, it is not possible to hold that all the four appellants had shared the common intention of causing such bodily injuries on the deceased as were likely to cause the death of Suku or were sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause his death. The appellants would, therefore be liable for the offence com- mitted individually by each one of them.

As already noticed, though it may not be possible to attribute to appellant No. 1, Subran, the necessary intention to cause death of Suku so as to hold him guilty of an offence of murder under Section 302 IPC since the injuries inflicted by him were not found to be sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death of Suku, but looking to the weapon with which he was armed and the nature number and seat of injuries inflicted by him though not on any vital part, he can certainly be attributed with the knowledge that with those injuries it was likely that death of Suku may be caused and, therefore, he can be cloathed with the liability of causing culpable homicide not amounting to murder. The case of the first appellant, therefore, falls within Section 299 IPC punishable under Section 304 Part-1 IPC. We, accordingly, convict him for the said offence and sentence him to suffer rigorous imprisonment for a period of seven years and to pay a fine of Rs. 2000 (two thousand) and in default of payment of fine suffer further rigorous imprisonment for one year. Fine if realised shall be paid to the heirs of the deceased.

Coming now to the case of the other three appellants. Since, their conviction for an offence under Section 326 with the aid of Section 149 is not sustainable in law, we set aside their conviction under Section 326/149 IPC. They would be responsible for their individual acts. The injuries caused by Rajan and Preman appellants 2 and 3, were with a torch, iron rod and a cycle chain. None of the injuries caused by them according to the postmortem report were on any vital part of the body, though some of the injuries caused by blunt weapons were grievous in nature. We, therefore, convict each of the two appellants Rajan and Preman, for an offence under Section 325 IPC and sentence them to suffer rigorous imprisonment for two years each. So far as the fourth appellant Sura Surendran is concerned, he caused grievous injuries to the deceased with a knife. His offence would, therefore, fall under Section 326 IPC and convicting him for the said offence, we sentence trim to suffer rigorous imprisonment for a period of three years and to pay a fine of Rs. 500 (five hundred). In default of payment of fine he shall further suffer rigorous imprisonment for a period of three months. Fine, if realised shall be paid to the heirs of the deceased. The conviction of all the appellants for the offence under Section 324 as recorded by the learned Judges of the High Court as also for the other offences are maintained but without the aid of Section 149 IPC. In view of the sentences recorded for offence under Section 304 Part I against the first appellant Subran, Section 325 IPC against appellants 2 and 3, Rajan and Preman, and Section 326 IPC against Sura Ca, Surendran, appellant 4, no separate sentence are recorded for the other offences. The appeal is accordingly partially allowed and disposed of in the above terms.

N.V.K.						      Appeal
allowed partially.




================================================================================


================================================================================
CASE 9:
[Cites 12, Cited by 551]
Supreme Court of India
Apren Joseph Alias Current Kunjukunju & ... vs The State Of Kerala on 1 September, 1972
Equivalent citations: 1973 AIR, 1 1973 SCR (2) 16, AIR 1973 SUPREME COURT 1, 1973 3 SCC 114, 1973 MADLJ(CRI) 429, 1973 (1) SCJ 617, 1973 SCC(CRI) 195, 1973 2 SCR 16, (1972) 2 SC WR 734, 1972 SCD 1143
Author: I.D. Dua
Bench: I.D. Dua, J.M. Shelat, Hans Raj Khanna
           PETITIONER:
APREN JOSEPH ALIAS CURRENT KUNJUKUNJU & ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
THE STATE OF KERALA

DATE OF JUDGMENT01/09/1972

BENCH:
DUA, I.D.
BENCH:
DUA, I.D.
SHELAT, J.M.
KHANNA, HANS RAJ

CITATION:
 1973 AIR    1		  1973 SCR  (2)	 16
 1973 SCC  (3) 114
 CITATOR INFO :
 R	    1974 SC 985	 (2)


ACT:
Indian	Penal  Code-S. 302 read wth S. 148  and	 149-Murder-
Effect of belated F.I.R. when fatal.



HEADNOTE:
In  Cr.	  A.  No. 263 of 1971, accused Nos.  6	to  10	were
acquitted by the trial Court but the High Court reversed the
order  of acquittal and convicted them under S. 302/149	 and
148 of I.P.C. In Cr.  A. No. 300 of 1971, accused Nos.	1 to
5 were convicted under S. 302/148 I.P.C. by both the  Courts
below.
The alleged occurrence giving rise to the prosecution of the
appellants  took place on the night between December 13	 and
14  at	about  2 a.m. as a  result  of	political  animosity
between	  two	groups	of  people-the	Marxists   and	 the
agriculturists	called the "Karshak Sangham", in  Puthupally
village in Kottayam, Kerala.  The eyewitnesses, for fear  of
retaliation,  did not report the crime to the police.	Only
on  the next day, a member of the local panchayat (P.W.	 2),
lodged the F.I.R. at 8 A.M. at Kottayam East Police Station,
9 K.M. away from the place of occurrence.
Before	this  Court,  the following points  were  raised  on
behalf	of the appellants :-(i) that the  first	 information
report	is  highly belated and (ii) that  the  alleged	eye-
witnesses  did not lodge the complaint because they  had  in
fact not witnessed the occurrence, and the accused have been
falsely implicated.  Partly allowing the appeal,
HELD  :	 (i) The First Information Report  relating  to	 the
commission of an offence is not a condition precedent to the
setting in motion of a criminal investigation. [23 C]
R. V. Khwaja, I.L.R. [1945] Lah. 1, referred to.
Nor  does the statute provide that such	 information  report
can  only  be made by on eye-witness.  F.I.R.  is  not	even
considered a substantive piece of evidence.  It can only  be
used to corroborate or contradict the informants evidence in
court.	 But this information when recorded is the basis  of
the  case  set up by the informant.  It is  very  useful  if
recorded before there is time and opportunity to  embellish,
or before the informants' memory fades.
Undue  or unreasonable delay lodging the F.I.R.,  therefore,
gives rise to suspicion which put the Court on guard to look
for  the possible motive and the explanation for  the  delay
and  consider  its  effect on  the  trustworthiness  of	 the
prosecution  version.  No duration of time in  the  abstract
can be fixed as reasonably for giving information of a crime
to  the	 police,  the question of reasonable  time  being  a
matter for determination by the court in each case. [23 E]
(ii) In	 the , present case, the eye-witnesses were afraid
to  go	to the police station during night  time  and  their
evidence could not be shaken in cross-examination Keeping in
view  the  local  tense atmosphere and	the  effect  of	 the
ghastly	  murder   on  the   eye-witnesses,   their   strong
disinclination	to go and lodge the report during the  night
after the alleged
17
Occurrence,  which  seems quite normal,	 cannot.  by  itself
arouse	any suspicion about the prosecution case.   Further,
the  prosecution version as a whole, has also been  accepted
by both the Courts below for reasons which cannot be said to
be  unsound or implausible.  Therefore, the delay in  making
the F.I.R. has reasonably been explained by the	 prosecution
witnesses.
(iii)  It is not disputed and indeed both the  Courts  below
have  found that on December 12, 1970, there was full  moon,
and  ,is  such,	 there was moon-light at  the  time  of	 the
occurrence.  The nearest street light was about 130 ft. away
towards	 the  west  and the nearest  electric  post  on	 the
eastern	 side  was  about  90 ft. away	from  the  place  of
occurrence.  The light of the lorry, which was at the place,
also helped eye witnesses to clearly see who the  assailants
were.	The  concurrent conclusion of the two  Courts  below
leaves	no doubt that the witnesses present at the place  of
occurrence  were in a position to clearly see  and  identify
the  accused  persons  who  \were  not	strangers  to  them.
Therefore,  conviction of accused Nos.	1 to 5 under S.	 302
I.P.C.	and S. 148 is upheld as also the Sentence  under  S.
148 I.P.C. Accused No. 6 has also been rightly found  guilty
and his sentence is also confirmed.
(iv)As	regards accused Nos. 7 to 10, they did not  form  an
unlawful  assembly  with the common object  of	killing	 the
deceased.  Therefore, they are acquitted.
Khanna J. (dissenting) Held (i) From the evidence on  record
it was difficult to subscribe to the view that the witnesses
refrained from reporting the matter to the police soon after
the  occurrence because of fear.  The witnesses had not	 got
into  the lorry while the accused were on foot.	  It'  would
not have taken the lorry more than 15 or 20 minutes to reach
the  police  station.  Further, it cannot be said  that	 the
witnesses  were not conscious of the necessity of  informing
the police about the occurrence.
(ii) Even  if the witnesses were afraid to go to the  police
station in the night, they could have gone to the station in
the  morning because they did not remain confined  in  their
homes;	but were moving about and go to different places  on
the following morning, there is no satisfactory	 explanation
as  to why they did not go to the police station and make  a
report.	 Their failure to report to the police the following
day, creates considerable doubts about the veracity of their
evidence.
Thulia Kali v. State of Tamil Nadu Cr.	A. 165/71 decided on
February 25, 1972, referred to.
(iii)	  Further, the prosecution evidence is of a partisan
character.
(iv) The  circumstances	 of the case tend to show  that	 the
deceased  was killed at late hour during the night  between
December  13  and 14, 1970 when he was coming from  a  place
where  he  had	taken toddy.  The fact that  no	 report	 was
lodged	with the police during the night and no one went  to
the  village or raised a hue and cry tends to show  that  no
one  was  present  along with the  deceased  at	 that  time.
Therefore;  it is not possible to sustain the conviction  of
the  accused appellants on the evidence adduced in the case.



JUDGMENT:
CRIMINAL APPELLANT JURISDICTION : CRIMINAL Appeals Nos. 300 iiid 263 of 1971.

Appeals front the jud-ii-ient and order dated August 24, 1971 of the Hi,-h Court in Criiiiin,,ii Appeals Nos. 6(1)- to 168 ti)d R. T. No. 1 5 of 1 97 1 and Ci-. A. No. 25101/7 1.

3--L348Sup.C.I./73 1 8 A. S. R. Chari, N. Sudhakaran and P. Kesava Pillai, for the appellants. (.in both the appeals).

V. A. Seivid Muhmud and M. R. Krishna Pillai, for the res- pondent (in Cr. A. No. 263/71).

V. A. Seiyid Muhmad and A. G. Pudissery, for respondent (in Cr. A. No. 300/71).

The Judgment of Shelat, Acting C.I. and Dua. J. was delivered by Dua, J. Khanna, J. delivered a dissenting opinion.

DUA, J.-These are two appeals (Crl. A. no. 263 of 1971 and Crl. A. no. 300 of 1971) against a common judgment of the Kerala High Court disposing of four appeals (3 separate appeals by accused nos. 1 to 5 convicted by the Additional Sessions Judge, Kottayam and one appeal by the State against the acquittal of accused nos. 6 to 10 affirming the conviction and entence of accused nos. 1 to 5 and reversing the order of acquittal of accused nos. 6 to 10. convicting them under ss. 302/149, I.P.C. as also tinder s. 148, I.P.C. Accused nos. 1 to 5 have been sentenced to death by both the trial court and the High Court under s. 302, I.P.C. and to rigorous imprisonment for one year under s. '148 I.P.C. whereas accused nos. 6 to 10 leave been sentenced to im- prisonment for life by the High Court under s. 302/149, I.P.C and to rigorous imprisonment for one year under s. 148, I.P.C All the ten accused persons have appealled to this Court and they are :

1. Apren Joseph alias Current Kunjukunju,
2. Kochukunju Vasu alias Thankappan,
3. Velu Damodaran,
4. Kesavan Kumaran alias Kochu,
5. Cherian Mathew alias Scaria,
6. Mundan Poulose alias Baby.
7. Yohannan Pothan alias Koehn,
8. Gangadharan Bhaskaran.
9. Kutty Chellappan alias Iruttu,
10. Kunchan Sukumaran.
This is also the order in which these ten persons appeared Is accused in the trial.

Criminal Appeal No. 263 of 1971 has been presented to this Court under s. 2(a) of the Supreme Court (Enlargement of Criminal Appeal Jurisdiction) Act, no. 28 of 1970 by accused nos. 6 to 10 whose acquittal by the trial court was reversed by the High Court on appeal by the State Criminal Appeal No. 300 of 1971 under Art. 136 of the Constitution has been presented by accused nos. 1 to 5.

The alleged occurrence giving rise to the prosecution of the appellants took place at about 1 O'clock on the night between December 13 and 14, 1970 at a place oil Manarkad- Tenganal road on the southern side of Kalappurakal dispensary of Baby in Puthupally village in Kottayam. The occurrence is stated to be the result of political animosity between the members of the Marxist party and the members of an Organisation of agriculturists called "Karshak Sangham"

at Puthupally of which the deceased Kuruvilla was the Vice- President.
On the evening of December 13, there was a meeting of the Karshaka Sangham near the Puthupally junction and it was over at about 10-30 p.m. After attending the meeting (Pappu) Joseph (P.W. 1) and Joseph Cherian (P.W. 4) along with one Baby started for going home. Kuruvilla who met them at the Puthupully junction requested them to accompany him to the house of Yesu Kathanar (Christian priest) (P.W. 5) which was on the western side of Puthupally junction. They readily agreed with the result they all went together to the house of the priest along the Manarkad-Thenganal road. That road runs east to west. While Puthupally junction is on the eastern side Eramallur junction is on the Western side of this road. In order to reach the house of the priest one has to go through Eeamallur junction. After Kuruvilla had a talk with P.W. 5 and when they were returning through the same route, at the place of occurrence which is about 7 furlongs away from the house of P.W. 5 they met Mathayikutty (Mathayi) (P.W. 3) driving a lorry and coming from the opposite direction. On seeing them P.W. 3 stopped his lorry. One Achankunju was also in the lorry with P.W. 3. After stopping the lorry P.W. 3 told these four persons that accused no. 2 and others were coming that way armed with deadly weapons. P.W. 3 accordingly asked these four persons not to proceed towards Puthupally junction, at the same time offering to take them in his lorry. By the time this conversation was over the accused had already reached the scene of occurrence. As soon as they arrived there accused no. 1 Apren Joseph struck a blow with his chopper on Kuruvilla's head. Kuruvilla tried to ward it off with his right hand but was not successful. Accused nos. 2 and 3 (Kochukunju Vasu and Velu Damodaran) who had choppers in their hands also gave blows with their respective weapons on the back of Kuruvilla's head. This was followed by the first accused giving two more blows at Kuruvilla's right shoulder. The fourth accused Kesavan Kumaran stabbed Kuruvilla on his back with Mallapuram knife. The fifth accused Cherian Mathew also struck Kuruvilla thrice with an iron rod on his chest. Kuruvilla fell down and died after sometime. P.Ws 1 and 4 and Baby managed to get into the lorry when Kuruvilla was being beaten though while doing so they implored the accused persons not to kill Kuruvilla. However, P.W. 3 with the three men who got into the lorry at the place of occurrence (P.Ws 1 and 4 and Baby) and Achankunju who was already in the lorry drove away towards the west. The sixth accused Mundan Poulose hit him with a wooden spear. As the lorry started moving, the accused pelted stones at it. After dropping Achankunju at Eramaloor junction Mathayi (P.W. 3) took P.Ws 1 and 4 and Baby to the house of P.W. 5 and dropped them there. Thereafter P.W. 3 went to his own house. On account of fear he, however, did not go back towards his home by the same road but took a different route.
Early on the morning of December 14, 1970 Markose Mani (P.W.
2) who is a member of the local Panchayat came to know of Kuruvilla's death. He went to the scene of the occurrence and saw the dead body of the deceased. After getting whatever information he could gather there he went to Kottayam East police station, 9 k.m. away, and lodged the first information report (Ex. P-1) at about 8 a.m. According to this report Markose Mani ,came to know of Kuruvilla's death at about 5 O'clock early in the coming of December 14, 1970. Having gone to the spot he saw the dead body of the deceased. He noticed that the little finger of the right hand of the deceased had been cut off and the ring finger was hanging due to a cut. There were also cut in-
juries on the back of the head of the deceased. After stating what he had seen the informant proceeded to state :

"....... There was a meeting and procession of farmers at the Puthupally junction yesterday. The meeting was over at 10-30 in the night.
Deceased Kunju Kalappurakkal Baby, Padinjarekoothu Pappa, Inchalkkad Kovhu and some others had gone from Puthupally to take back the persons who had come from Eramallur for the procession. What I came to know is that while they were returning after getting down the, persons who had for the procession at Kochalum Moodu somebody killed him by inflicting cut injuries at about 2 O'clock in the night at the place where the dead body lay. It is heard that Achankala Vaslu, Valia Veettil Pothan, current Kunju Kunju, Carpenter Damodaran,lnchakad Bhaskaran and some others belonging to the Marxist party who are opponents of the farmers lad followed the persons who had gone to Eraniallur after the meet at Puthupally held on yesterday and while Kunju etc., were returning from Kochalummoodu Somebody among them killed Kunju by inflicting cut injuries at that place by attacking him. The dead body of Kunju is lying there. I am the member of the IV Ward in Puthupally Panchayat. I have come over here to report the matter. The place of occurrence is 9 k.m. away towards southeast from here......."
The, Additional Sessions Judge trying the case found accused nos. 1 to 5 guilty of an offence under s. 302, I.P.C. and sentenced them to death. They were also found guilty of an offence under s, 148, I.P.C. and sentenced to rigorous imprisonment for one year each. Accused nos. 6 to 10 were, however, acquitted of all the charges, reliance for the order of acquittal having 'been placed on a decision of this Court in Masalti etc. v. State of Uttar Pradesh(1). The convicted persons and the State, both, appealed to the High Court of Kerala. The High Court, in a fairly exhaustive judgment, affirmed the convictions and sentences of accused nos. 1 to 5 and dismissed their appeals. The reference in regard to their death sentence was accepted. The State appeal against the acquittal of accused nos. 6 to 10 was allowed and their acquittal set aside. They were sentenced to imprisonment for life under s. 302/149, I.P.C. and to rigorous imprisonment for one year under s. 148, I.P.C. The sixth accused was also sentenced to rigorous imprisonment for one year under s. 324, I.P.C. for causing injury (an incised wound) with a wooden spear to Joseph Cherian (P.W. 4).

Before us it was strongly urged by Shri Chari on behalf of the appellants that the first information report was lodged after 'a very long delay and this in the circumstances of the case is fatal to the prosecution. The submission most seriously pressed, and this appears to us to be the basic submission which is sought to be supported by reference to other factors, is that no one had actually witnessed the occurrence and that the whole of the prosecution story has been fabricated with the object of falsely implicating all the accused persons, who are enemies of the prosecution witnesses. The story invented 'by the prosecution, it was argued, is the work of a highly imaginative and fertile brain. The first information report, contended Shri Chari in his usual forceful manner, was lodged after a long delay because a plausible tory had to be built up involving the accused so as to fit in with be murder of the deceased at the place where his dead body was bound, and this, emphasised the counsel, was the real cause for (1) [1964] 8 S.C.R. 133 not lodging the report immediately after the alleged occurrence, be interval between the alleged occurrence and the time when the prosecution story was unfolded to the police was, according to the submission, utilised in inventing the story to be placed before the police. Now if this argument is accepted then obviously the prosecu- tion story has to be rejected and all the appellants acquitted. We have, therefore, to seriously examine the challenge to the prosecution story on the basis of the argument that the first information report is highly belated and that the alleged eye witnesses did not lodge it because they had in fact not witnessed the occurrence. It may be pointed out that the factum of the unnatural death of the deceased by violence, at the place where his dead body was found is not disputed; nor has the time of his death been controverted. The sole argument vehemently pressed upon us is, that no one saw the deceased bring murdered and the accused have been falsely implicated, on account of enmity, by the prosecution witnesses who have deposed to an imaginary story concocted by them. 'there is of course no dispute that there was considerable ill-will between the workers of the Marxist party in the local Puthupalli area and the members of the Krishak Sangham. Indeed, even according to the accused, there had been a quarrel between these two groups about 20 days prior to the occurrence in dispute. Some. of the accused persons were involved in-other criminal cases as well. But enmity as is well-known is a doubleedged weapon. Whereas the accused may rely on it in support of their plea of false implication, the prosecution on the other ,hand may legitimately argue that this provided the necessary motive for the offence. It is that none of the persons who claim to have been with the deceased since about 10-30 p.m. right up to the time of occurrence informed the police or made any attempt to do so:

nor did K. Achan Kunju who was sitting in the lorry next to Mathayi (P.W. 3). Mathayi, however, does state in his evidence that he made an attempt to contact the police on telephone but the telephone line being out of order he did not succeed. This, he did, from the house of Attupurathu Punnachan where he stopped for this purpose on his way back home from the house of Achan (P.W. 5). The contention forcefully pressed before us is that P.W. 3 who was driving the lorry could have driven straight to the police station and lodged the necessary information. Indeed ' the submission proceeds like this. After having left the scene of the alleged murder P.W. 3 and his companions in the lorry could and should have gone straight to the police station to lodge the first information report. In any even. P.W. 3, who, on his own showing, tried to contact the police of telephone but failed to do so as the telephone line was out on order, Could and should, after this unsuccessful attempt, have proceeded in his lorry to the police station to make the report. This should have been considered to be more important than going to his home. The fact that none of these persons considered it important enough or even proper to go and lodge the first information report shows that no one witnessed the murder and the whole story deposed by the prosecution witnesses in court is a concoction which is the outcome of the fertile brain of P.Ws. 1, 3, 4 and 5 and does not represent the truth.
Now first information report is a report relating to the commission. of an offence given to the police and recorded by it under s. 154, Cr. P.C. As observed by the Privy Council in H.E. v. Khwaja(1) the receipt and recording of information report by the police is not a condition precedent to the setting in motion of a criminal investigation. Nor does the statute provide that such information report can only be made by an eye witness. First information report under s. 154 is not even considered a substantive piece of evidence. It can only be used to corroborate or contradict the informant's evidence in court. But this information when recorded is the basis of the case set up by the informant. It is very useful if recorded before there is time and opportunity to embellish or before the informant's memory fades. Undue or unreasonable delay in lodging the F.I.R., therefore, inevitably gives rise to suspicion which puts the court on guard to look for the possible motive and the explanation for the delay and consider its effect on the trustworthiness or otherwise of the prosecution version. In our opinion, no duration of time in the abstract can be fixed as reasonably for giving information of a crime to the police, the question of reasonable time being a matter for determination by the court in each case. Mere delay in lodging the first information report with the police is, therefore, not necessarily, as a matter of law, fatal to the prosecution. The effect of delay in doing so in the light of the plausi- bility of the explanation for the coming for such delay accordingly must fall for consideration on all the facts and circumstances of a given case.
In the case in hand the eye witnesses who had seen the occurrence were afraid of going to the police station during night time. The evidence to this effect seems to us to be trustworthy and has not at all been shaken in cross- examination. The. submission that no reasonable human being in those circumstances could or should have felt frightened and, therefore, the round of fear is a mere excuse is unacceptable. Indeed, there- is,--hardly any effective cross-examination on the. point (1) I.L.R. 1945 Lah. 1.
eliciting any illuminating information indicative of suspicion with respect to their reluctance to go, during the night or earl), in the morning, to the police station for making the report. The effect on their mind of having witnesses such a gruesome murder at the hands of a group of persons armed with lethal weapons and extremely inimical to the eye witnesses, cannot be measured by any general yard- stick. It necessarily depends on the mental make up of each individual person. Some may feel so frightened that they would rue their decision which took them to the place of occurrence and would take a Ion(, time to be their normal self, whereas some others would not mind informing the police if they can conveniently do so without going out or their way: still others may be highly public-spirited and may,therefore.feel so, strongly that they would in their, enthusiasm go all out.as though inspired by missionary seal, to contact thepolice and inform them about the crime. It is difficult as also inadvisable to lay down any uniform general rule in this respect. As each case has to be considered on its own facts and circumstances let us see how the courts below have dealt with this question. The trial court repelled the defence contention in these words "It has been pointed out on behalf of the defence that none of the persons who were along with the deceased informed the police. P.W. 3 swears that he made an attempt to contact the police over phone. But because of some line disorder he could not inform the police. P.W. 2 is the Panchayat Member of Ward no. 4 of Puthupally Panchayat. He got information in the early hours of morning and went to the place of occurrence and saw the deceased. Thereafter he proceeded to the police station and gave Ex. P1 statement.

The fact that none of the persons who was present at the time of occurrence did not inform the police is not sufficient to warrant a conclusion that the alleged eye witnesses were not present there."

In the High Court also this criticism was repeated but met with no better fate. This is what Narayana Pillai J., said in this connection :

"........ One has to visualise the situation in which P.Ws. 1 and 4 and Baby were at the time. There were many active members and sympathisers of the Marxist Party at Puthupally. That party had strong foothold 'there. The 10th accused was the Secretary of that party there. The formation of the Karshaka Sangham which was opposed to the Marxist Party was not to the liking of members of the Marxist Party. Ten to twenty days before the occurrence there was a quarrel between members of the Marxist Party and the Karshaka Sanghams at Eramalloor about the putting up of bands on paddy fields. There was also a quarrel between Kuruvilla and members of the Marxist Party about agricultural labour at one Puthukari field which belongs to several persons. The whole atmosphere must have been surcharged with fear after the meeting of the Karshaka Sanghani on the 13th evening was over. There was no residential house anywhere near the scene. The road there was desolate. There was, therefore, nothing unusual if P.Ws.
1. 3 and 4 and Baby left the place at the time of the occurrence for safety instead of remaining there to render assistance to Kuruvilla. Although P.W. 3 had before tile occurrence offered to take P.Ws. 1 and 4 and Baby in his lorry, after the occurrence he thought that to take them in his lorry was risky and that was why at the Eramalloor junction he asked them to get out of the lorry. P.W.s. 1 and 4 and Baby were in a room in the house of P.W. 5 for the rest of the night. At 7. 15 a.m. P.W. I went out of that house."
Moidu J., in a separate concurring note dealt with this matter more specifically and observed :

"The only circumstance pointed out during the argument of the learned counsel was that these witnesses could not have seen the occurrence and that if they had seen they would have reported the incident to the police without delay. The evidence was clear to show that these witnesses would not have dared to get out of the place where they stayed in the night after the gruesome murder was committed. Neither P.W. nor P.W. 4 was prepared to get out of the house of P.W. 5 at midnight. P.W. 3 had to go to his house by a different route and though he made an attempt to inform the police he did not succeed. On the next (lay P.W. 3 had to go to Erumeli with the lorry and lie returned home only by about 5.30 p.m. Within a short time thereafter he was questioned by the police."
From this it is obvious that keeping in view the local tense atmosphere and the effect of this ghastly murder on the eye witnesses, their strong disinclination to go and lodge the report during the night after the alleged occurrence, which seems quite natural, cannot by itself arouse any suspicion about the prosecution case. The bad condition of the road, not permitting the lorry to go faster than six or ten miles per hour. as stated by P.W. 3, may also have consciously or unconsciously deterred them, to some extent, from risking a visit to the police station during the night. In this connection it would not be unimportant to bear in mind that P.W. 3 did not possess a driving licence and he would naturally have hesitated in driving the lorry to the police station. The concurrent conclusions of the two courts ,below on this point deserve serious consideration and cannot ,be lightly brushed aside. But that apart, it would also need a ,highly creative and fertile brain to cook up an imaginary story embodying in it, the peculiar features of the prosecution case, and that also within a short span of time, after learning of the on the morning of December 14, 1970 and before making the statement to the police at noon the same day as deposed by P.Ws. 1 and

14. In fact P.W. 2, a member of Panchayat, who is no partisan and whose statement is corroborated by P.W. 14 had, already informed the police (per Ex. P-1) much earlier at about 9 a.m. about what he had seen at the place of occur rence and what he had heard involving five accused persons. This adds to the vulnerability of the defence version. Features which seem peculiar for their insertion in an imaginary story which could hardly be circulated so early as to reach P.W. 2 to enable him to go to the spot and then to go to lodge the F.I.R. at 9 a.m. are (i) bringing on the scene (a) a lorry driven by its owner (P.W. 3) who does not belong to Karshak Sanghani and who normally does not drive that lorry and does not even possess a driving licence but has employed a wholetime driver for the said lorry; (b) the other eye witnesses along with the companion of P.W. 3, Kadiyathuruthil Achan Kunju who has not appeared as a witness, (ii) to make P.W. 3 drive the eye witnesses to the house of Achan for dropping them there. after having dropped Kadiayathuruthil Achan Kunju on the road, and finally (iii) on his way back home to make P.W. 3 attempt unsuccessfully to contact the police on telephone from the house of Attupurathu Punnachan. What is more intriguing is that as many as ten accused persons should have been involved but only five assigned overt acts in the murder and one only an injury with a wooden spear to P.W. 4, the rest (including accused no 10, the Secretary of the Marxist Party) being only involved as members of the unlawful assembly. In the absence of a plausible and rational explanation as to why only ,accused nos. 1 to 5 should have been selected by the author of this concocted imaginary version for the direct and active role in the murder, this feature also tends to discount the credibility of the defence version. Now, assuming such a fictional story to have been invented in. retrospect, for this is the only altemative to the witnesses having actually seen the commission of the murder. one has to ponder to find a rational and plausible ans-

were to several puzzling questions. To begin with it is not understood where was the necessity of introducing P.W. 3 instead of his driver. And then what was the reason for bringing Kadiyathuruthil Achan Kunju in the picture when he was not to appear as a witness. It is also not easy to understand, on the evidence and in the peculiar circumstances of this case, as to how the prosecution witnesses deposing about the occurrence, other than P.W. 3, managed to get together for consultation, after learning of the murder and then how, where and when, did they contact P.W. 3 with the object of prevailing upon him to take up the important role in this drama and subscribe to this imaginary story. P.W. 3 was cross-examined at great length but his credibility was not at all shaken. He said in a forthright manner that he had ' reached his house on the fateful night at about 2 a.m. and on the following morning at about 6 or 7 O'clock he went to Eramalloor from where he returned at 5.30 p.m. and it was then that he learnt about Kunju's death. He had, however, narrated the incident to his wife and brother on reaching his house at 2 a.m. His statement was recorded by the police at about 7 p.m. on his return from Eramalloor. His testimony appears to be straightforward and impressive, and it has been believed by the courts below. No convincing arguconcoctedstory P.W. 3 could not reasonably have been assigned a role ofsuch vital importance. Indeed, his presence seems to be a strong factor which renders the defence theory incredible and establishes the truth of the prosecution version. But apart from the inherent weakness of the theory of the story having been concocted to falsely implicate the accused persons, the prosecution version as a whole has also been accepted by both the trial court and the High Court for reasons which cannot be said to be unsound or implausible. In fact, there appears to be a ring of intrinsic truth in this version.

The trial court believed the version given by P.W. 4 as also the testimony of, P. Ws. 1, 3 and 5. P.W. 5 was not an eye witness to the occurrence but he fully corroborated that the deceased and P.Ws 1, 4 and Baby had gone to him by 11.30 p.m. and later at 1.30 a.m. The three persons, other than the deceased, returned to him and informed him of the occurrence. The trial court felt that P.W. 5 had no reason to falsely swear against the accused. The story given by P.Ws, 1, 3 and 4 was considered by the trial court to be consistent and reliable. The High Court in an exhaustive judgment after discussing the criticism levelled against the prosecution version observed "We have carefully gone through the entire evidence of all the witnesses. On all material matters the evidence of P.Ws 1, 3 and 4 is clear, consistent and convincing. All the facts spoken to by them strike as nothing but truth. They are quite natural witnesses. There is absolutely nothing in their evidence to dis- believe them. They corroborate each other. Their evidence is also corroborated by the circumstances brought out in the, case. The trial Judge believed them and we consider rightly. It is proved beyond reasonable doubt that it was in the manner spoken to by P.Ws 1, 3 and 4 that the occurrence took place."

We have not been persuaded to hold that these concurrent conclusions of the two courts are in any way tainted by an infirmity justifying interference by us in the present appeal so far as accused nos. 1 to 5 are concerned whose appeal has been presented under Art. 136 of the Constitution. Even otherwise the conclusions are unexceptionable on the material to which our attention is drawn and we unhesitatingly agree with them. It is not disputed and indeed both the courts below have found that on December 12, 1970, there was full moon and as such there was moonlight at the time of the occurrence. The nearest street light is also stated to be about 130 ft. towards the west and the nearest electric post on the eastern side was about 90 ft. away from the place of occurrence. The light of the lorry also, helped the eye witnesses to clearly see who the assailants were. The concurrent conclusion of the two courts below leaves no doubt that the witnesses present at the place of the occurrence were in a position to clearly see and identify the accused persons who were :not strangers to them.

The mere fact that the eye witnesses did not gather up enough courage to go to the police station to lodge the first information report or to 0 to the place of the occurrence during the night or early in the following morning to give some aid to the deceased, who undoubtedly was no blood-relation of any one of the witnesses, does not show that they had not witnessed the occurrence and the whole story is imaginary and made up only for falsely implicating the accused due to enmity. P.W. 3 having decided to go home with the lorry, the other witnesses quite naturally did not dare to move about during the night. The conviction of accused Nos. 1 to 5 under s. 302 I.P.C. and s. 148 is upheld as also the sentence under s. 148 I.P.C. In so far as accused no. 6 is concerned the High Court has believed the testimony of P.W. 4 which is corroborated by the medical evidence. We see no reason to differ with the conclusion of the High Court. He must, therefore, be held to have been rightly found guilty of inflicting injury with the wooden spear on P.W. 4. The sentence imposed on him is also not open to any objection. This injury was apparently not inflicted pursuant to the common object to kill the deceased but only when provoked by P.W.4.

This takes us to the case of accused nos. 7 to 10 who have been convicted by the High Court of ail offence under s. 148, I.P.C. It is true that these accused persons were accompanying the others but no overt act has been imputed to them. The entire occurrence seems to have taken place within a short span of time and it is difficult to hold that they formed an unlawful assembly with the common object of killing the deceased. No doubt, in their case this Court has to go into the entire evidence because their appeal had been presented under Act No. 28 of 1970. The evidence does not seem to show that they were aware of the common object of accused nos. 1 to 5 to kill the deceased. They must, therefore, be- acquitted of the charge under ss. 308/ 149. Evidence is also wanting on the record to show that these accused persons were parties to any common object of committing any unlawful act which accused nos. 1 to 5 had in view. We have, therefore, no hesitation in acquitting them of the charge under s. 148, I.P.C. as well. On the same reasoning accused no. 6 is also acquitted of charges under ss. 302/149 and s. 148, Indian Penal Code.

We should like to point out that in this case the learned counsel for the appellants was permitted to refer to any evidence he considered proper for considering the credibility of the witnesses with regard to the whole of the prosecution story because with respect to accused nos. 6 to 10 the appeal was not before us under Art. 133 of the Constitution but under S. 2(a) of the Supreme Court (Enlargement of Criminal Appellate Jurisdiction) Act, 28 of 1970. It was, therefore, only proper that the evidence be appraised by this Court with respect to all the accused per- sons, in order to avoid conflict in the conclusions in this respect.

Coming to the question of sentence imposed on accused nos. 1 to 5, after the amendment of S. 367(5), Cr.P.C. in 1955 it is a matter of judicial discretion for the court to decide on a consideration of all the relevant circumstances of the case, which of the twopermissible sentences under s. 302, I.P.C. should be imposed. It is no longer necessary to give reasons for the lesser penalty. The determination of sentence in a given case depends on a variety of considerations, the more important being, the nature of the crime, the manner of its commission. the motive which impelled it and the character and antecedents of the accused. So far as the accused before us are concerned it 3 0 appears that in their excessive zeal for their party they felt unduly provoked by the success of the meeting organised by the Karshak Sangham and being misguided by political intolerance and cult of violence they committed the offences in question soon after the said meeting. We, therefore, feel that the interest of justice would be fully served in this case if we substitute the sentence of imprisonment for life for the sentence of death. We, however. must not be understood to lay down any general rule with regard to Science applicable to all cases of political murders. Murder inspired by differences of political opinions as ideologies, it may be pointed out, is wholly inconsistent with our system of government ",here the Constitution has guaranteed freedom of thought and expression to all citizens and parties, so long as they act within the Constitution and the law. We have reduced the sentence of death to that 'of life imprisonment on accused nos. 1 to 5 in this, case because of the peculiar circumstances already mentioned. The sentence under s. 148 I.P.C. would be concerned with the sentence under s. 302 I.P.C.

The appeals are, accordingly disposed of as stated in this judgment.

KHANNA, J. Ten accused Apren Joseph (36), Kochukunju Vasu (32) Velu Demodaran (32), Kesavan Kumaran (24), Cherian Mathew (34), Mudan Poulose (30), Yohanna Pothen (45), Gangadharan Bhaskaran (24), Kutty Chellappan (42) and Kunchan Sukumaran (40) were tried in the court of learned Additional Sessions Judge Kottayam for offences under section 302, section 302 read with section 149, section 324 read with section 149, 148 and 143 Indian Penal Code in connection with the murder of Kuruvilla alias Kunju (50) and for causing hurt to PW 4 Joseph Cherian (31). The trial court convicted accused 1 to 5 for offences under section 148 and 302 Indian Penal Code and sentenced them to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of one year on the former count and to death on the latter count. Accused 6 to 10 were acquitted. On appeal and reference, the Kerala High Court confirmed the conviction and sentence of accused 1 to

5. The High Court further on State appeal convicted accused 6 to 10 under section 148 and section 302 read with section 149 Indian Penal Code and sentenced them to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of one year on the former count and imprisonment for life on the latter count. The sixth accused was also convicted under section 324 Indian Penal Code and was sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of one year. The sentences awarded to each of accused 6 to 10 were ordered to run concurrently. Accused 6 to 10 have filed 'criminal appeal No. 263 of 1971 under Act while accused 1 to 5 have filed criminal appeal No. 300 of 1971 by special leave. This judgment would dispose of both the appeals.

The ten accused belong to the Communist Party (Marxist)., Accused No. 10 was the Secretary of that party in the area., Kunju deceased was the Vice President of an organization of agriculturists called 'Karshaka Sangham' at Puthuppally. Yesu Kathanar (PW 5), who is a priest, was the President of the, Karshaka Sanghani in the adjoining village Eramalloor. There was some dispute between Kunju deceased and the accused relating to a ridge and regarding work in the paddy fields. About, 20 days before the occurrence, there was aquarrel between persons belonging to Karshaka Sangham and those belonging to the Marxist party.

According to the prosecution case, there was a meeting of the Karshaka Sangham on the evening of December 13, 1970 at, Puthuppally junction. Earlier on that day the organizers of the,meeting alsoarranged a procession. The meeting was over at, about 10 or10.30 p.m. Pappu (PW 1), who was present in the meeting,then wanted to go to his house along with one. Achankunju and Kai ' appurakkal Baby. Kunju deceased then called Pappu and his companions and requested them to accompany him to the house of Yesu Kathanar (PW 5). Pappu and. his two companions agreed and accompanied by them, Kunju. deceased went to the house of Yesu Kathanar. They arrived at, that house at about 11.30 p.m. Kunju had some talk with Yesu and thereafter Kunju and his three companions left the house of Yes at 12 mid-night. It was a moonlit night. There was also, light from the electric poles. When Kunju and his three companions were going on the road in front of a dispensary, they saw the lights of a lorry coming from the eastern side. Kunju got on one side of the road, while his three companions got on the, other side of the road. The lorry was driven by Mathayi (PW 3), who then told Kunju and his companions that Vasu, accused No. 2, and the other accused were coming that way armed with weapons and that Kunju and others should not go in that direction but should get into the lorry. Immediately thereafter accused No. 1 arrived there and aimed a blow with a chopper at Kunju. Kunju warded off the blow with Ws right hand. The, other accused also in the meanwhile arrived there. Accused 2 and 3 then gave blows on the back of the head of Kunju with choppers. Accused No. inflicted two injuries on the right shoulder of Kunju. Accused 4 then stabbed Kunju deceased in his back with a Malapuram. knife. At the same time, accused 5 gave three blows with an iron rod in the chest of the deceased. Kunju deceased fell down on receipt of these injuries. The corn-.

panions of Kunju then got into the back of the lorry and shouted to the accused not to kill Kunju. Accused No. 6, who had a wooden spear, then gave a blow with it on the right hand of Achan-Kunju. The lorry then started. While the lorry was ,moving away, some stones were thrown on the lorry by the accused. The lorry thereafter stopped at Eramalloor second junction where Achan-Kunju got down from the lorry. Mathayi asked Pappu and his companions also to get down from the lorry, but they declined to do so and told Mathayi to drop them at the house of Yesu PW. Time then was past 10 O'clock. Pappu. Baby and Joseph Cherian got down near Yesu's house and told Yesu PW that accused Nos. 1, 2, 10 and others had killed Kunju. Pappu, Baby and Joseph thereafter slept at the house of Yesu. ,On the following morning they left the house of Yesu.

The case of the prosecution further is that on the morning ,of December 14, 1970 Markose (PW 2) whose house is situated near Puthupally market, was told about the present occurrence by his children. Markose is a member of the Panchayat. After taking coffee Markose went at 6.30 a.m. to, the spot where the dead body of Kunju was lying. Markose thereafter went to the Kottayam police station at a distance of 9 kilometers from the place of occurrence and lodged there report Ex. P1 at 8. a.m. According to that report, Kunju deceased-had been killed by body at 2 a.m. Markose added that he had heard that accused Nos. 1, 2, 3, 7 and 8 had followed the persons who had gone to Eramalloor after the meeting at Puthuppally. Somebody amongst them was stated to have killed Kunju.

Circle Inspector John (PW 15) then went to the spot of occur rence and arrived there at It a.m. The Inspector found the dead body lying there and prepared the inquest report. The dead body was thereafter sent to the mortuary where post mortem examination was performed by Dr. George Paul (PW 7) at 3.30 p.m. on that day. Joseph Cherian also earlier on that day got himself examined from Dr. Nair (PW 6) at 10 a.m. The doctor found an incised wound 1"X1/4" x 1/4" on the posterior aspect of right forearm of Joseph. There was also an abrasion on the lip and a contusion on the right side of the face of Joseph P.W. Accused 7, 8 and 10 were arrested on December 18, 1970. Accused 1 to 6 surrendered in the court of magistrate on December 21. 1970, while accused No. 9 surrendered in that court on December 23, 1970. No weapon alleged to have been used by the accused could be recovered by the police.

At the trial the prosecution examined Pappu (PW 1 Mathayi (PW 3) and Joseph (PW 4) as eye witnesses of the occurrence and they supported the prosecution case. Achan Kunju and Baby were given up by the Public Prosecutor.

The plea of all the accused in the course of their statements under section 342 Code of Criminal Procedure was denial simpliciter. According to them, they had been falsely involved in this case because they belonged to the Communist Party (Marxist). No evidence was produced in- defence.

Learned Additional Sessions Judge held that accused 1 to 5 had formed an unlawful assembly after arming themselves with deadly weapons with the common object of committing, murder of Kunju deceased. It was further held that those five accused had caused injuries to Kunju deceased with their respective weapons. They were accordingly convicted under section 148 and 302 Indian Penal Code. Accused 6 to 10 were acquitted as, in the opinion of the learned judge, they were not shown to be members of an unlawful assembly. As regards injury on the person of Joseph (PW 4), the trial judge observed that it could not be said that the above injury was inflicted by accused No. 6 as alleged by the prosecution. On appeal the High Court agreed with the conclusion of the trial court so far as the guilt of the accused 1 to 5 was concerned. As regards accused 6 to 10, it was observed that it was not necessary to show that they had committed some illegal overt act or had been guilty of some illegal omission. In the opinion of the High Court,-the circumstances of the case showed that all the accused were members of an unlawful assembly and that the common object of that assembly was to do away with Kunju deceased, who had earlier on that day organized the meeting. In the result, accused 6 to 10 were also convicted as mentioned earlier. It cannot be disputed that Kunju deceased died as a result of the various injuries which were inflicted upon him. According to Dr. George Paul, who performed post mortem examination on the body of the deceased, there were 21 injuries on the body of the deceased, out of which 7 were incised wounds, one was a stab wound and two were cut wounds. Besides that, there were four contused abrasions and 7 abrasions. The, stab wound was on the left side of the back of the chest, while the cut wounds were on the little finger of the right hand. One of the incised wounds was on the back of the right hand, while another incised wound was on the left hand. The stomach contained 280 mls of greyish white fluid with a smell similar to that of tody. The following incised wounds were sufficient, in the opinion, of the doctor. to cause death in the ordinary course of nature :

"(1) Incised wound 14.5 cm. long, I am gaping obliquely placed on the right side of the back of the head, the lower and inner end being on the midline at 4-L348Sup.C.I./73 the level of the top of the ears. The wound had clear cut margins and the ends were sharp.
The underlying skull bone was cut through for 12 cm and fissured fractures were found running outwards for 2 and 5 cm respectively from the upper and middle portions of the outer edge of the cut on the skull. The coverings of the brain were torn and the brain contused under the fractures.

(2)Incised wound 13.5 cm long 1.5 cm gaping horizontally placed at the back of the head at level of the lower end of injury No. (1) right end being at a higher level and both ends being 7.5 cm behind the cars. Wound had clean cut margins and ends were sharp and the lower edge showed shelving. Ile underlying skull was cut through for 10.5 cm and the left occipital borne of the brain showed a cut 2 cm deep.

(3)Incised wound 5 x 1.5 cm bone deep obliquely placed at the back of the head 2 cm below injury No.(2).Margins were clearly cut and the upper edge shownshelving.

(4) Incised wound 7.5 cm long 1.5 cm gaping vertically placed on the back of the right shoulder, the upper end being at the level of the top of the, shoulder with clean cut margins and sharp ends, the underlying spine of the shoulder blade was cut through exposing the shoulder joint cavity.

(5)Incised wound 10.5 cm x 3 cm muscle deep vertically placed on the right side of the back and top of the shoulder, 8 cm inner to injury No. (4). The wound had clean cut margins the upper end was sharp and lower end showed tailing for 2.5 cm."

According to the prosecution case, the injuries found on the body of Kunju deceased were caused by accused 1 to 5. In support of its case, the prosecution has examined Pappu (PW

1), Mathayi (PW 3) and Joseph (PW 4) as eye witnesses of the occurrence. The above mentioned three witnesses, as stated earlier, supported the prosecution case and their evidence was accepted by the trial court and the High Court. Mr. Chari on behalf of the appellants has assailed the ocular evidence adduced by the prosecution and has contended that it suffers from serious infirmities. As against that, Dr. Mahmood on behalf of the State has canvassed for the correctness of the view taken by the High Court.

This Court normally does not interfere with the appraisement of evidence of the trial court and the High Court, but that fact would not prevent this Court from interfering if it is found on scrutiny of the evidence that it suffers from glaring infirmities. As many as five persons have been sentenced to death in this case and five others have been sentenced to undergo imprisonment for life. It is essential, in my opinion, that the evidence should be clear and cogent, so as to bring the charge home to the accused beyond all reasonable doubt.

According to the prosecution case, Pappu (PW 1) and Joseph (PW 4) were going with Kunju deceased from the house of Yesu PW at about I am when Kunju was attacked by the party of the accused. Mathayi (PW 3) claims to have witnessed the occurrence because, according to him, he arrived at the spot shortly before the occurrence in his lorry after paying a visit to a contractor. It is also in the evidence of the three witnesses that soon after the accused had caused injuries to Kunju and the latter had fallen down, Pappu and Mathayi PW s along with Baby, who too was with them, got into Mathews' lorry which was then driven away by Mathayi. The conduct of these witnesses if they had, in fact, witnessed the occurrence after that was most unnatural for none, of them made any serious attempt to inform the police about the occurrence. It is in the evidence of the above mentioned witnesses that at first Achan-Kunju was dropped from the lorry at the next junction at a distance of about one furlong from the scene of occurrence. Thereafter the lorry was taken by Mathayi at the request of Pappu and others to the house of Yesu PW and Pappu PW, Joseph PW and Baby were dropped there in front of that house. Mathayi thereafter took the lorry to his own house. Pappu, Joseph and Baby after informing Yesu about the occurrence are stated to have slept at Yesu's house, while Mathayi remained at his own house. There is nocogent explanation as to why the above mentioned witnesses did not go at that time in the lorry to the police station and lodge a report about the occurrence. If, in fact, a murderous assault had been made on Kunju deceased in their presence, this would have been the normal reaction of the eye witnesses. No attempt was made in the judgment of Narayana Pillai J., who wrote the main judgment of the High Court, to find any explanation for the above conduct of the eye witnesses. Moidu J., who added a small note, mentioned that the above was indeed the principal contention which had been advanced on behalf of the accused.In the opinion of the learned Judge, the witnesses could not have dared to go out of the place where they were staying for the night after the gruesome murder. I find it difficult to subscribe to the view that the witnesses reframed from reporting the matter to the police soon after the occurrence because of fear. The witnesses had got into the lorry, while the accused were on foot. The police station was at a distance of only nine kilometers from the place of occurrence. It would not have taken the lorry more than 15 or 20 minutes to reach the police station. There could be no apprehension in the minds of the witnesses that they would be overtaken and assaulted by the accused because the accused were on foot while the witnesses had the advantage of being in a lorry.

It also cannot be said that the witnesses were not conscious of the necessity of informing the police about the occurrence. According to Mathayi (PW 3), he went to the house of one Attupurathu Punnachan before going to his house and tried to send telephonic intimation to the police. The witness added that he could not contact the police because the telephone line was out of order.

Another unnatural feature of the conduct of Pappu, Mathayi and Joseph PWs is that they made no attempt to see as to what was the condition of Kunju deceased after the assault and whether the deceased needed some The witnesses were apparently not aware at the time they left the scene of occurrence that Kunju had died because according to their evidence they shouted at that time to the accused not to kill Kunju. Had Kunju died in the presence of the witnesses, there would have been no occasion for the witnesses to shout to the accused at the time they left not to kilt the deceased. Indeed, according to Mathayi (PW 3), he came to know of the death of Kunju only on the' following day at 5.30 p.m. It may also be observed in this context that the evidence of Dr. Paul, who performed post mortem examination on the body of the deceased, shows that the deceased might have survived for some time after the assault. It also cannot be said that the witnesses did not go out of fear after the occurrence to the place where the deceased was lying because in the normal course of events the assailants do not remain at the spot of occurrence after the assault.

Even if it may be assumed that Pappu, Mathayi and Joseph PWs were afraid to go to the police station in the darkness of the night, there appears to be no justification cogent reason for their not reporting the matter to the police early oil the following morning-. It is in evidence that on the following morning the about. According to Pappu (PW 1) he went to Puthupally in a bus on the following morning and passed through the spot where the dead body of Kunju was lying. The witness did not step down from the bus despite the fact that he saw the dead body lying there. Mathavi (PW

3) admits that he went on the following morning at 6 a.m. to Erumeli and returned from that place at 5.30 p.m. Joseph PW states that he went to Vakathanam Hospital by bus at 7.15 a.m. on the following morning. If the three eye witnesses could move about and go to different places on the following morning, there is no satisfactory explanation as to why they did not go to the police station and make a report about the occurrence if, in fact, Kunju deceased had been subjected to a murderous assault in their presence. The failure of Pappu, Mathayi and Joseph PWs to report the matter to the police creates considerable doubt about the veracity of the evidence of these witnesses that they had seen the accused causing injuries to the deceased. This Court in the case of Thulia Kali v. State of Tamil Nadu (Criminal Appeal No. 165 of 1971 decided on February 25, 1972) stressed the importance of making prompt report to the police regarding the commission of cognizable offence. It was observed :

"First information report in a criminal case is an extremely vital and valuable piece of evidence for the purpose of corroborating, the oral evidence adduced at the trial. The importance of 'the above report can hardly be overestimated from the standpoint of the accused. The object of insisting upon prompt lodging of the report to the police in respect of commission of an offence is to obtain early information regarding the circumstances in which the crime was committed, the names of the actual culprits and the part played by them as well as the names of eye witnesses present at the scene, of occurrence. Delay in lodging the first information report quite often results in embellishment which is a creature of afterthought. On account of delay, the report not only gets bereft of the advantage of spontaneity, danger creeps in of the introduction of coloured version exaggerated account or concocted story as a result of deliberation and consultation. It is, therefore, essential that the delay in lodging of the first information report should be satisfactorily explained."
Apart from the above infirmity in the evidence of three eye witnesses, I find that the prosecution evidence is of a partisan character and not such on which implicit reliance can be placed. Pappu (PW 1) admits that there was a criminal case between his cousin and the fifth accused five or six months before the present occurrence. Pappu was asked whether be was a member of the Karshaka Sangham. He denied this fact though he admitted that he had paid money to Kunju for the meeting of Karshaka Sangham which had been earlier held on the day of occurrence. The evidence of Joseph PW, however, shows that Pappu is a member of Karshaka Sangham. Joseph PW admits that there were two cases against him for good conduct. Joseph and two others were also sentenced to pay fine in connection with an assault on a tapper. There was also some property dispute in which Joseph and Kunju were arraigned as accused but they were acquitted. Joseph is a member of Karshaka Sangham and was earlier also cited as a witness in a case against the accused.

The prosecution has tried to seek corroboration of the evi- dence of eye witnesses from the testimony of Yesu ( PW 5), who has deposed that on the night of occurrence at first Kunju deceased came to his house accompanied by Pappu, Joseph and Baby, and that subsequently Pappu, Joseph and Baby came to the house and informed him of the occurrence. Yesu, as already stated earlier, is the President of Karshaka Sangham in Eramalloor. It is admitted by Yesu that he was accused in a case concerning the church. He was also accused in another criminal case. One other case had been filed against him. Shortly before his evidence in court he was accused in a case filed in the court of District Magistrate. Yesu was also a prosecution witness in a case in the Court of Sub-Divisional Magistrate Kottayam in which certain remarks were made against Yesu. Yesu thereafter filed a petition in the High Court for expunging those re- marks. Yesu was asked whether a finding had been given in a civil case that he had forged a document. Yesu admitted that there had been such a case, but according to him, it related to the correction of a document. It further in the evidence of Yesu that the police had sent up for trial Yesu's son and four others for causing injuries to accused No. 10. In view of the above, I find it difficult to place much reliance upon his testimony.

Reference has also been made by Dr. Mahmood to the fact that an incised wound was found on the person of Joseph PW by Dr. Nair when he examined Joseph on the morning of December 14, 1970. It is urged that the aforesaid injury was caused to Joseph by accused No. 6 with a wooden spear. The presence of the said injury, according to the learned counsel, lends assurance to the testimony of Joseph that he was present at the scene of occurrence. In this respect I find that according to Dr. Paul, who is Assistant Professor of Forensic Medicine in Medical College, Trivendrum, the incised wound could not be caused with a wooden spear and that such a spear would cause only a lacerated injury. Dr. PauL's testimony thus creates some doubt regarding the reliability of the prosecution evidence that Joseph had received injury with a wooden spear at the hand of accused No. 6. In any case the aforesaid injury could have been caused in a variety of circumstances and would not necessarily show that Joseph was present at the scene of occurrence.

The circumstances of the case tend to show that Kunju de- ceased was killed at a late hour during the night between December 13 and December 14, 1970 when he was coming from a place where he had taken toddy. The fact that no report was lodged with the police during the night and no one went to the, village abadi and raised hue and cry tends to show that no one was present along with the deceased at that time. His dead body, it seems, was discovered in the morning and thereafter a report was lodged by Markose who admittedly was not a witness of the occurrence. Markose in the report mentioned the names of only accused 1, 2, 3, 7 and 8 and, according to him, he had heard that someone out of them had killed Kunju deceased. In my opinion, it is not possible to sustain the conviction of the accused appellants on the evidence adduced in the case.

I, therefore, accept the appeal, set aside the conviction and acquit the accused.
================================================================================


================================================================================
CASE 10:[Cites 18, Cited by 147]
Supreme Court of India
Vivek Gupta vs Central Bureau Of Investigation And ... on 25 September, 2003
Equivalent citations: AIR 2004 SUPREME COURT 361, 2003 (11) SCC 146, 2003 AIR SCW 6392, (2003) 8 JT 296 (SC), (2004) 1 JCR 140 (SC), (2003) 5 LAB LN 199, 2003 (6) SLT 724, 2003 (9) SCALE 272, 2003 (4) LRI 532, 2003 (8) JT 296, (2004) 2 MAD LJ 113, (2003) 4 SCT 867, (2004) 1 SERVLR 287, (2004) 1 SUPREME 26, (2003) 9 SCALE 272, (2003) 5 ESC 240, (2003) 12 INDLD 486, (2004) 3 BOM CR 796, AIR 2004 SUPREME COURT 797, 2003 AIR SCW 6993, 2005 SCC(CRI) 801, (2003) 12 ALLINDCAS 773 (SC), 2003 (8) SCALE 655, 2003 (12) SCC 485, 2003 (4) LRI 294, 2003 CRIAPPR(SC) 642, 2003 (12) ALLINDCAS 773, 2004 (1) SRJ 181, 2003 (6) SLT 539, 2006 ALL MR(CRI) 6 NOC, (2004) 1 EASTCRIC 10, 2004 CHANDLR(CIV&CRI) 407, (2003) 4 CURCRIR 255, (2004) 1 ALLCRIR 524, (2003) 8 SCALE 655, (2004) 1 MPHT 476, (2003) 47 ALLCRIC 1157, (2003) 3 CHANDCRIC 165, (2004) 1 ALLCRILR 749, AIRONLINE 2003 SC 275, (2003) 11 INDLD 726, (2003) 26 OCR 744, (2003) 2 ALD(CRL) 1012, (2003) 3 CHANDCRIC 83, (2003) 4 ALLCRILR 734, (2003) 4 CRIMES 174, (2003) 4 CURCRIR 137, (2003) 4 KHCACJ 244 (SC), (2003) 4 RECCRIR 549, (2003) 6 SUPREME 921, (2003) 8 SCALE 100, 2003 (8) SCC 628, 2003 CHANDLR(CIV&CRI) 699, (2004) 1 ALLCRIR 243, (2004) 1 ANDHLT(CRI) 9, (2004) 1 BOMCR(CRI) 549, (2004) 1 JCJR 26 (SC), (2004) 2 RAJ CRI C 517, (2004) 50 ALLCRIC 19, 2004 ALLMR(CRI) 1184, 2004 SCC (CRI) 51, (2004) SC CR R 493, 2004 UJ(SC) 1 140, (2005) 3 EASTCRIC 215
Author: B.P. Singh
Bench: N.Santosh Hegde, B.P. Singh
           CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.)  1249 of 2002

PETITIONER:
Vivek Gupta				           	

RESPONDENT:
Central Bureau of Investigation and another 	

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 25/09/2003

BENCH:
N.Santosh Hegde & B.P. Singh.

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T B.P. SINGH, J.

In this appeal by special leave the core question which arises for consideration is whether the appellant herein can be charged and tried together with the other two accused by the Special Judge under the provisions of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988, in view of the fact that the appellant herein has been charged only under Section 420 I.P.C. and under Section 120-B read with Section 420 I.P.C. while the other two accused have been additionally charged of the offence under Section 13(2) read with Section 13(1)(d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (hereinafter referred to as the "Act"). The appellant contends that the Special Judge under the Prevention of Corruption Act has no jurisdiction to try the appellant who is not charged of any offence under the said Act, while the respondent contends to the contrary relying upon the provisions of the said Act and the Code of Criminal Procedure. The High Court of Bombay by its impugned judgment and order has answered the question in the affirmative holding that the appellant can be tried by the Special Judge under the Prevention of Corruption Act along with the two accused who also stand charged of offences under the Act.

Before adverting to the submissions urged at the Bar, we may very briefly notice the broad facts of the case to appreciate the nature of the allegations made against the appellant and the other two accused. Accused No.1 Sri G.B. Nande was at the relevant time the Manager of the Commercial Branch of the State Bank of India, Fort, Bombay, while accused No.2 Sri J.S. Kelkar was an Accountant employed in the same branch of the State Bank of India. The appellant herein is accused No.3 who transacted business with the said branch of the State Bank of India on behalf of eight companies with which he was associated. There is considerable controversy as to whether the appellant was a Director of those companies or whether he was simply representing them as their representative. This, however, is not of much consequence in this appeal. The case of the prosecution is that the appellant entered into a conspiracy with the aforesaid officers of the bank to cheat the bank. A clever device, rather intricate in nature, was conceived by them whereby eight separate accounts were opened in the name of the companies concerned and overdraft facility was extended to the companies on the representation of the appellant and with the assistance of the aforesaid officers of the bank. The aforesaid officers of the bank misused their official position and in a dishonest manner the banking business was transacted in such a manner that it caused substantial monetary loss to the bank. This was achieved by the appellant and the officers of the bank acting in concert, pursuant to the conspiracy. The aforesaid officers of the bank abused their official position as public servant and by corrupt or illegal means obtained pecuniary advantage for themselves and others. The Special Judge, therefore, framed charges against all the three accused for the offence punishable under Section 120-B read with Section 420 I.P.C. The appellant herein was additionally charged of the offence under Section 420 I.P.C. Accused Nos. 1 and 2, the bank officers were also charged of the offence punishable under Section 13 (2) read with Section 13 (1) (d) of the Act.

Sri S.B. Sanyal, learned senior advocate appearing on behalf of the appellant submitted that in view of the express provisions of Section 3 of the Act, the Special Judge could only try offences which are punishable under the Act or any conspiracy to commit or any attempt to commit or abetment of any of the offences punishable under the Act. Sub- section (3) of Section 4 empowers the Special Judge to try an accused at the same trial for any offence committed under any law other than an offence punishable under the Act. He, however, added that before an accused can be charged and tried by the Special Judge for any offence other than an offence under the Act, the necessary pre-condition is that the said accused must also be charged of an offence under the Act or conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit or abetment of any offence under the Act. He, therefore, submitted that since the appellant herein was charged only of offences under Section 420 and Section 120-B read with Section 420 I.P.C., he could not be tried by the Special Judge even with the aid of sub-Section (3) of Section 4 of the Act. He submitted that only the co-accused, who were officers of the bank, were charged of offences under the Act and there was no charge against the appellant of having committed any offence under the Act or of having conspired, attempted or abetted to commit an offence under the Act. Clearly therefore, according to him, the Special Judge had no jurisdiction to try the appellant along with the co-accused in the same trial. He did not dispute the position that so far as the co-accused are concerned, the Special Judge had jurisdiction to try them for any offence under the Act and even for the offence under Section 120-B read with Section 420 I.P.C. However, since the appellant was not charged of any offence specified in Section 3 of the Act, the Special Judge had no jurisdiction to try him for the offence under Section 420 I.P.C. or even under Section 120-B read with Section 420 I.P.C. treating him as a co-conspirator of the co- accused.

Shri P.P. Malhotra, senior advocate appearing for the respondent- CBI, however, contended that the appellant being a co-conspirator, and the Special Judge having jurisdiction to try the co-accused for the offence under Section 120-B read with 420 I.P.C., the jurisdiction of the Special Judge to try the appellant was not in doubt. He submitted that it would be rather incongruous that on a charge of conspiracy some of the conspirators may be tried by the Special Judge while others must be tried by the Courts under the Code of Criminal Procedure. He placed strong reliance on two decisions of this Court namely, Kadiri Kunhahammad vs. The State of Madras : AIR 1960 SC 661 and Union of India vs. I.C. Lala : A.I.R. 1973 S.C. 2294 and submitted that applying the principles laid down by this Court, the High Court was right in holding that the appellant could be tried along with the co-accused by the Special Judge in the same trial even for the offences not specified under Section 3 of the Act, but forming a part of the same transaction which led to the commission of an offence under the Act, for which the public servants concerned were charged in addition to the offence of conspiracy under the I.P.C.

To appreciate the force of the rival submissions, it is necessary to notice the relevant provisions of the Act and the Code of Criminal Procedure. Section 3 and Section 4 of the Act read as follows :-

"3. Power to appoint special Judges.- (1) The Central Government or the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint as many special Judges as may be necessary for such area or areas or for such case or group of cases as may be specified in the notification to try the following offences, namely :-
(a) any offence punishable under this Act;
and

(b) any conspiracy to commit or any attempt to commit or any abetment of any of the offences specified in clause (a).

(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a special Judge under this Act unless he is or has been a Sessions Judge or an Additional Sessions Judge or an Assistant Sessions Judge under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).

4. Cases triable by special Judges. - (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), or in any other law for the time being in force, the offences specified in sub-section (1) of section 3 shall be tried by special Judges only.

(2) Every offence specified in sub-section (1) of section 3 shall be tried by the special Judge for the area within which it was committed, or, as the case may be, by the special Judge appointed for the case, or, where there are more special Judges than one for such area, by such one of them as may be specified in this behalf by the Central Government.

(3) When trying any case, a special Judge may also try any offence, other than an offence specified in Section 3, with which the accused may, under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), be charged at the same trial.

(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), a special Judge shall, as far as practicable, hold the trial of an offence on day-to-day basis.

Section 22 of the Act provides that the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 shall, in their application to any proceeding in relation to an offence punishable under the Act, have effect subject to certain modifications specified therein. The modifications of the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure in their application to offences punishable under the Act do not modify the provisions of Chapter XVII of the Code of Criminal Procedure with which we are concerned in the instant appeal. It is, therefore, apparent that the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure do apply to trials for offences under the Act subject to certain modifications as provided in Section 22 of the Act unless the application of any provision of the Code is excluded either expressly or by necessary implication.

Section 220 of the Code of Criminal Procedure provides as follows :-

"220. Trial for more than one offence.-
(1), If, in one series of acts so connected together as to form the same transaction, more offences than one are committed by the same person, he may be charged with, and tried at one trial for, every such offence.
(2) When a person charged with one or more offences of criminal breach of trust or dishonest misappropriation of property as provided in sub-section (2) of section 212 or in sub-section (1) of section 219, is accused of committing, for the purpose of facilitating or concealing the commission of that offence or those offences, one or more offences of falsification of accounts, he may be charged with, and tried at one trial for, every such offence.
(3) If the acts alleged constitute an offence falling within two or more separate definitions of any law in force for the time being by which offences are defined or punished, the person accused of them may be charged with, and tried at one trial for, each of such offences.
(4) If several acts, of which one or more than one would by itself or themselves constitute an offence, constitute when combined a different offence, the person accused of them may be charged with, and tried at one trial for the offence constituted by such acts when combined, and for any offence constituted by any one, or more, or such acts.
(5) Nothing contained in this section shall affect section 71 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).
The relevant provisions of Section 223 of the Code read as under:-

"223. What persons may be charged jointly. - The following persons may be charged and tried together, namely :-
(a) persons accused of the same offence committed in the course of the same transaction ;
(b) persons accused of an offence and persons accused of abetment of, or attempt to commit, such offence ;
(c) ... ... ...
(d) persons accused of difference offences committed in the course of the same transaction ;
(e) ... ... ...
(f) ... ... ...
(g) ... ... ...
A mere perusal of Section 4 of the Act clearly mandates that as specified in Section 3, offences punishable under the Act or any conspiracy, attempt or abetment to commit an offence under the Act shall be tried by a Special Judge appointed in accordance with Section 3 of the Act. Sub-section (3) of Section 4 also lays down clearly that while trying any case for an offence specified in Section 3 of the Act, a Special Judge may also try any offence other than offences specified in Section 3 with which the accused may under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 be charged at the same trial. It therefore follows that a Special Judge trying a case relating to an offence specified in Section 3 of the Act may also try any offence under any other law for which, under the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the accused may be charged at the same trial. Thus in cases within the contemplation of Section 4 (3) of the Act, the Special Judge is not precluded from trying an offence other than an offence specified in Section 3 of the Act.

We have earlier reproduced the provisions of Section 220 of the Code. The aforesaid Section will clearly apply to the case of co-accused who undoubtedly must be tried by the Special Judge for the offence under Section 120-B read with Section 420 I.P.C., apart from the offence under the provisions of the Act. This is so because in the facts of this case there is no doubt that the offence under the Act and the offence under the I.P.C of which they have been charged were committed in the course of the same transaction. Even Mr. Sanyal, learned senior advocate appearing for the appellant did not dispute this position. His submission is that since the co-accused have been charged of offences under the Act, they can be tried by the Special Judge for other offences as well if such other offences have been committed in the course of the same transaction. He submitted that "accused" in Sub-section (3) of Section 4 refers to an accused who is charged of offences specified in Section 3 of the Act. Therefore, he contends that since the appellant is not charged of any offence specified in Section 3 of the Act, his case will not be covered by sub-section (3) of Section 4.

On the other hand Sri P.P. Malhotra, senior advocate for the respondent contends that once it is held that the co- accused can be tried by the Special Judge of the charge under Section 120-B read with Section 420 I.P.C., it must logically follow that the co-conspirators must also be tried with them in the same trial, and for this he places strong reliance on the provisions of Section 223 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.

We have given to the rival submissions our deep consideration and we are of the view that the contention of the respondent must be upheld. It is worth noticing that Sub-section (3) of Section 4 of the Act provides that a Special Judge may "also try any offence" other than an offence specified in Section 3 with which the accused may under the Code of Criminal Procedure be charged at the same trial. We have observed earlier that the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure apply to trials under the Act subject to certain modifications as contained in Section 22 of the Act and their exclusion either express or by necessary implication.

Section 223 of the Code of Criminal Procedure has not been excluded either expressly or by necessary implication nor has the same been modified in their application to trials under the Act. The said provision therefore is applicable to the trial of an offence punishable under the Act. The various provisions of the Act which we have quoted earlier make it abundantly clear that under the provisions of the Act a Special Judge is not precluded altogether from trying any other offence, other than offences specified in Section 3 thereof. A person charged of an offence under the Act may in view of sub-section 3 of Section 4 be charged at the same trial of any offence under any other law with which he may, under the Code of Criminal Procedure, be charged at the same trial. Thus a public servant who is charged of an offence under the provisions of the Act may be charged by the Special Judge at the same trial of any offence under I.P.C. if the same is committed in a manner contemplated by Section 220 of the Code.

The only narrow question which remains to be answered is whether any other person who is also charged of the same offence with which the co-accused is charged, but which is not an offence specified in Section 3 of the Act, can be tried with the co-accused at the same trial by the Special Judge. We are of the view that since sub-section (3) of Section 4 of the Act authorizes a Special Judge to try any offence other than an offence specified in Section 3 of the Act to which the provisions of Section 220 apply, there is no reason why the provisions of Section 223 of the Code should not apply to such a case. Section 223 in clear terms provide that persons accused of the same offence committed in the course of the same transaction, or persons accused of different offence committed in the course of the same transaction may be charged and tried together. Applying the provisions of Sections 3 and 4 of the Act and Sections 220 and 223 of the Code of Criminal Procedure it must be held that the appellant and his co-accused may be tried by the Special Judge in the same trial.

This is because the co-accused of the appellant who have been also charged of offences specified in Section 3 of the Act must be tried by the Special Judge, who in view of the provisions of sub-section (3) of Section 4 and Section 220 of the Code may also try them of the charge under Section 120-B read with Section 420 I.P.C. All the three accused, including the appellant, have been charged of the offence under Section 120-B read with Section 420 I.P.C. If the Special Judge has jurisdiction to try the co-accused for the offence under Section 120-B read with Section 420 I.P.C., the provisions of Section 223 are attracted. Therefore, it follows that the appellant who is also charged of having committed the same offence in the course of the same transaction may also be tried with them. Otherwise it appears rather incongruous that some of the conspirators charged of having committed the same offence may be tried by the Special Judge while the remaining conspirators who are also charged of the same offence will be tried by another Court, because they are not charged of any offence specified in Section 3 of the Act.

Reliance was placed by the respondent on the judgment in Union of India vs. I.C. Lala : A.I.R. 1973 S.C. 2294 but counsel for the appellant distinguished that case submitting that the facts of that case are distinguishable in as much as in that case apart from the two army officers, even the third appellant who was a businessman, was charged of the offence punishable under Section 120-B I.P.C. read with Section 5 (2) of the Act. Such being the factual position in that case, Section 3 (1) (d) of the relevant Act was clearly attracted. In the instant case he submitted, there was no charge against the appellant of having conspired to commit a offence punishable under the Act. The aforesaid judgment refers to an earlier decision of this Court in the case of State of Andhra Pradesh vs. Kandimalla Subbaiah and another : AIR 1961 SC 1241. Learned counsel for the appellant distinguishes that case also for the same reason, since in that case as well the respondent was charged of conspiracy to commit an offence punishable under the Act.

We are, therefore, of the view that in the facts and circumstances of this case, the Special Judge while trying the co-accused of an offence punishable under the provisions of the Act as also an offence punishable under Section 120-B read with Section 420 I.P.C. has the jurisdiction to try the appellant also for the offence punishable under Section 120-B read with Section 420 I.P.C. applying the principles incorporated in Section 223 of the Code. We, therefore, affirm the finding of the High Court and dismiss this appeal.
================================================================================


################################################################################
                    CATEGORY 3: CONTRACT LAW DISPUTES
                              (5 CASES)
################################################################################

================================================================================
CASE 11:
[Cites 73, Cited by 6]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
T.A. Choudhary vs State Of A.P. And Ors. on 1 May, 2003
Equivalent citations: 2004(3)ALD357
Author: R. Subhash Reddy
Bench: R. Subhash Reddy
JUDGMENT
 

G. Bikshapathy, J.
 

1. All the CMAs, and CRP can be disposed of by a common judgment as they arise out of an award passed by the learned Arbitrator dated 30-9-1991.

2. The facts culminating in the present cases are traced out as follows:

For the sake of convenience, the parties are hereinafter referred to as the department and the Contractor respectively.
3. The Contractor entered into an agreement with the department for the works forming approaches to the R&B in M.18/4 of Guntur-Repalle Road (K.M.06 of Nidubrole-Govada Road) in Ponnur Municipal limits including the formation of the service roads on either side of the overbridge of Nidubrole in lieu of level crossing No. 267 of Vijayawada-Gudur Section in Guntur District.

4. Agreement was entered on 27-11-1978 between the parties and the time for completion of the work was fixed at 15 months from the date of handing over the site. According to the department, the site was handed over on 27-11-1978, but the work was completed only by the end of January, 1985. After the work was over, the Contractor laid a claim on 16-6-1992 to the Superintending Engineer and thereafter he filed OP No. 21 of 1988 for appointment of Arbitrator, Accordingly, the Honourable Sri Justice C. Sree Ramulu, Judge (Retd.), High Court of Andhra Pradesh was appointed as Arbitrator to adjudicate all the disputes between the parties. He entered the reference and passed the award on 30-9-1991. Thereafter the Contractor filed OS.No. 1088 of 1991 to make the award Rule of Court and filed OP No. 269 of 1992 to set aside the award to the extent, the learned Arbitrator rejected the claims. OP No. 47 of 1992 was filed by the department to set aside the award dated 30-9-1991 insofar as it allowed the claims of the Contractor. By a common judgment dated 30-11-1993, the Civil Court decreed the suit OS.No. 1088 of 1991 making the award as Rule of Court except claims No. 1, which was rejected. The learned Arbitrator also allowed the interest @ 6% per annum from the date of the decree. He dismissed OP No. 269 of 1992 filed by the Contractor and also OP No. 47 of 1992 filed by the Department except claim No. 4. Aggrieved by the judgment and decree passed by the Civil Court in OS No. 1088 of 1991, the department filed CRP No. 2726 of 1994 and dismissing the OP No. 47 of 1992 of the department to set aside the award, the department filed CMA No. 1079 of 1994. CMA No. 953 of 1994 was filed by the Contractor challenging the judgment and decree of the Civil Court insofar as it rejected the claims of the Contractor. The details of the claims made by the Arbitrator and the decision of the Arbitrator are set out infra. A claim petition was filed by the Contractor under Clause 73 of PS to APDSS for adjudication of the disputes relating to the execution of the work referred to above and the learned Arbitrator entered on reference on 30-12-1989 and passed the award on 30-9-1991.

5. It was the case of the Contractor that on account of the delay on the part of the department in handing over the site completely, the work could not be completed and on account of the non-completion of the Land Acquisition proceedings in most of the places, the work was held up and consequently the time for completion of the work was extended from time to time on account of which the Contractor was made to pay escalated rates. On the other hand, it was the case of the department that the delays are attributable to the Contractor and that they are not liable for payment of any extra amounts. The details of the amounts claimed by the Contactor and allowed/rejected by the learned Arbitrator are as follows:

Claim No. Description Amount claimed Amount awarded     Rs.
Rs.
1.
Compensation towards element of escalation 16,00,000/-

5,70,000/-

2. Loss due to idle labour and advances 6,70,000/-

Rejected

3. Idle wanes for machinery 2,62,000/-

-do-

4. Payment for overlapse and spacer bars on Steel reinforcement in RCC items 1,20,000/-

89,400/-

5. Refund of seigniorage recoveries 61,812/-

Allowed

6. Waiver of penalties 2,000/-

Allowed

7. Overhead charges 2.00,000/-

Rejected

8. Loss of profit 20,00,000/-

62,134/-

6. However in respect of the aforesaid amounts, the Civil Court made the award Rule of Court except claim No. 4 which was disallowed. To the said extent, the Contractor filed an appeal before this Court.

7. The learned Arbitrator framed the following issues for consideration:

(1) Whether the delay in the execution of the work was caused by the defaults, indecision and breaches committed by the department?
(2) Whether the claimant is entitled to any of the claims, if so, to what extent?
(3) Whether the claimant is entitled to any interest on the amounts claimed ?
8. The learned Arbitrator has considered the issue relating to the delay in execution and defaults on the part of the parties. After reference to various correspondence between the Contractor and the department, the learned Arbitrator observed that the delays and breaches were solely attributable to the department. The learned Arbitrator also found that the complete site was not handed over on 27-11-1988 and additional sub-ways were approved while the work was in progress. It was also admitted that there was some items of work, which was entrusted to some other Contractors and the work in Block Nos. 5 to 8 were withdrawn from the works of the claimant. After a detailed discussion and also taking into consideration Ex.C-90, the learned Arbitrator found that the department was solely responsible for the delays.

9. The learned Government Pleader tried to contend that the said finding of the Arbitrator is wholly illegal and contrary to the material on record. But, we are not prepared to accept his contention. The learned Arbitrator has thoroughly discussed this issue with reference to the voluminous documents pressed into service by both the parties. The learned Arbitrator categorically found that the correspondence of the department itself disclosed that the department was responsible for the delay. It was also observed that there was lot of demand from the public regarding subways which resulted in additional work. The telephone lines were not cleared and thus they caused obstruction to the work. It was also found that the site was cleared off by removing the stagnated water and made fit for forming the service road in 1981. Thus, he came to the conclusion that the construction of bridge across Tungabhadra Drain and Srirangapuram channel in Repalle-Guntur road and subway on Repalle side approach abutting Railway bridge and the overbridge over the Railway track are closely interlinked with the present work of the Contractor and the works were completed in 1981-84 resulting in delay and completion of the work within the agreed period. He also found that the work in respect of one block was in interconnected with the adjacent blocks as such unless and until the work in a particular block is completed, the work of the adjacent block could not be commenced. Thus, we do not find any infirmity in the findings recorded by the learned Arbitrator holding that the Department was solely responsible for the delays and committed breach of agreement.

10. The learned Arbitrator clubbed claims No. 1, 2, 3, 6, 7 and 8. He awarded a sum of Rs. 7,85,346/- after rejecting the claim under Clause Nos. 2, 3 and 7.

11. The learned Government Pleader submits that the above claims as awarded by the learned Arbitrator are not sustainable as the learned Arbitrator erred in not taking into account that the agreement was entered at 19.9% excess over the estimated rates. The estimated value based on SSR of 1977-78 was Rs. 37,23,549-31 while the value for the agreement was Rs. 44,67,667/-. The learned Arbitrator allowed 30% escalation out of which 19.9% was already taken care of in awarding the work. Therefore, 19.9% should have deducted from the awarded amount under the said award.

12. The learned Government Pleader would also submit that under Clause 59 of Preliminary Specifications to A.P. Detailed Standard Specifications (PS to APDSS), the Contractor-claimant is only entitled for extension of time and he is not entitled for any compensation. He also submits that the Arbitrator has to consider the matter within the framework of the terms of the contract and he cannot wander beyond the scope of the contract. Inasmuch as under Clause 59, the payment of compensation is prohibited, the learned Arbitrator ought not to have allowed the claims referred to above. Strong shelter is taken by the learned Government Pleader under Clause 59. He relies on the decision of the Supreme Court reported in State of U.P. v. Abhai Kishore Masta; 1994 (5) SCALE 57, and General Manager, Northern Railway v. Sarvesh Chopra, .

13. On the other hand, the learned Counsel for the respondent submits that this issue has been settled in various decisions of the Supreme Court as well as this Court and it was found when Clause 59 is not applicable, it is open for the Arbitrator to award the amounts and such a decision of the Arbitrator cannot be interfered with.

14. Both the Counsel relied on host of the decisions which will be referred to hereinafter.

15. Before going into the spectrum of Clause 59, it is necessary to refer to the parameters of interference over the award of the Arbitrator by the Courts under Section 30 of 1940 Act. It is needless to mention that the judgments on this aspect are numerous. However, in order to avoid repetition and to touch upon the relevant issues, we are inclined to refer to few judgments, which have almost traced out the entire gamut of principles settled by the Supreme Court in various cases right from the inception.

16. The Supreme Court in Indu Engineering and Textiles Limited v. Delhi Development Authority, , while dealing with the scope of Section 30 held thus:

"5. The scope for interference by the Court with an Award passed by the Arbitrator is limited. Section 30 of the Arbitration Act, 1940 (for short "the Act") provides in somewhat mandatory terms that an Award shall not be set aside except on one or more of the grounds enumerated in the provision. The three grounds set out in the Section are:
(a) that an Arbitrator or Umpire has misconducted himself or the proceedings;
(b) that an Award has been made after the issue of an order by the Court superseding the arbitration or after arbitration proceedings have become invalid under Section 35;
(c) that an Award has been improperly procured or is otherwise invalid.
Interpreting the statutory provision Courts have laid stress on the limitations on exercise of jurisdiction by the Court for setting aside or interfering with an Award in umpteen cases. Some of the well recognised grounds on which interference is permissible are:

(1) Violation of principle of natural justice in passing the Award;
(2) Error apparent on the face of the Award;
(3) The Arbitrator has ignored or deliberately violated a clause in the agreement prohibiting dispute of the nature entertained.
(4) The Award on the face of it is based on a proposition of law, which is erroneous, etc.
6. In U.P. Hotels and Ors. v. U.P. State Electricity Board, , this Court in Paras 17 and 18 observed as follows:
"17. It appears that the main question that arises is : whether the decision of this Court in Indian Aluminum Company v. Kerala State Electricity Board, , case was properly understood and appreciated by the learned Umpire and whether he properly applied the agreement between the parties in the light of the aforesaid decision. It was contended that the question whether the sums payable under Clause 9 included discounts. On the aforesaid basis it was contended that there was an error of law and such error was manifest on the face of the Award. Even assuming, however, that there was an error of law in arriving at a conclusion, such an error is not an error, which is amenable to correction even in a reasoned Award under the law. Reference may be made to the observations of this Court in Coimbatore District P.T. Sangam v. Balasubramania Foundry, , where it was reiterated that an Award can only be set aside if there is an error on its face. Further, it is an error of law and not mistake of fact committed by the Arbitrator which is justiciable in the application before the Court. Where the alleged mistakes or errors if any of which grievances were made were mistakes of facts if at all and did not amount to error of law apparent on the face of the record, the objections were not sustainable and the Award could not be set aside. See also the observations of this Court in Delhi Municipal Corporation v. Jagannath Ashok Kumar, , where this Court reiterated that reasonableness of the reasons given by an Arbitrator in making his Award cannot be challenged. In that case before this Court, there was no evidence of violation of any principle of natural justice and in this case also there is no violation of the principles of natural justice. It may be possible that on the same evidence some Court might have arrived at some different conclusion than the one arrived at by the Arbitrator but that by itself is no ground for setting aside the Award of an Arbitrator. Also see the observations in Halsbury's Laws of England, 4th edn., Vol.2, at pages 334 and 335, para 624, where it was reiterated that an Arbitrator's Award may be set aside for error of law appearing on the face of it, though that jurisdiction is not likely to be exercised. If a specific question of law is submitted to the Arbitrator for his decision and he decides it, the fact that the decision is erroneous does not make the Award bad on its face so as to permit it being set aside; and where the question referred for arbitration is a question of construction, which is, generally speaking, a question of law, the Arbitrator's decision cannot be set aside only because the Court would itself have come to a different conclusion; but if it appears on the face of the Award that the Arbitrator has proceeded illegally, as, for instance, by deciding on evidence which was not admissible, or on principles of construction which the law does not countenance, there is error in law which may be ground for setting aside the Award. 18. It was contended by Mr. F.S. Nariman, Counsel for the appellant, that a specific question of law being a question of construction had been referred to the Umpire and, hence, his decision, right or wrong, had to be accepted. In view of Clause 18, it was submitted that in this case a specific reference had been made on the interpretation of the agreement between the parties, hence, the parties were bound by the decision of the Umpire. Our attention was drawn to the observations of this Court in Hindustan Tea Company v. K. Sashikant and Company, JT 1986 SC 818 = 1986 Supp. SCC 506, where this Court held that under the law, the Arbitrator is made the final arbiter of the dispute between the parties, referred to him. The Award is not open to challenge on the ground that the Arbitrator has reached a wrong conclusion or has failed to appreciate facts. Where the Award which was a reasoned one was challenged on the ground that the Arbitrator had acted contrary to the provisions of Section 70 of the Contract Act, it was held that the same could not be set aside."

17. Yet in another recent case in Sikkim Subba Associates v. State of Sikkim, , the Supreme Court copiously referred to the earlier decision right from Champsey Bhara and Company v. Jivraj Balloo Spinning and Weaving Company Limited, AIR 1923 PC 66 and observed thus:

"(12) Relying upon the ratio in Champsey Bhara and Company v. Jivraj Balloo Spinning and Weaving Company Limited, AIR 1923 PC 66 this Court in, Alopi Parshad and Sons Limited v. Union of India, observed that the Award may be set aside on the ground of an error on the face thereof, when in the Award or in any document incorporated with it, as for instance, a note appended by the Arbitrator(s) stating the reasons for the decision wherein the legal propositions which are the basis of the Award are found to be erroneous. A specific question submitted to the Arbitrator for his decision, even if found answered wrongly involving an erroneous decision in point of law also, was considered not to make the award bad on its face so as to call for interference. While emphasizing the position that 'misconduct' in Section 30(a) of the Act comprises legal misconduct, this Court held it to be complete in itself when the arbitrator was found to have, on the face of the award, arrived at a decision by ignoring very material and relevant documents which throw abundant light on the controversy to help a just and fair decision or arrived at an inconsistent conclusion on his own finding (K.P. Poulose v. State of Kerala, ). In Chahal Engineering and Construction Company v. Irrigation Department, Punjab, Sirsa, , this Court held that the words "is otherwise invalid" in Clause (c) of Section 30 of the Act would include an error apparent on the face of the record. In Trustees of the Port of Madras v. Engineering Constructions Corporation Limited, , after adverting to the ratio of the Constitution Bench of this Court in Rapur Development Authority v. Chokhamal Contractors, (1989) 2 SCC721 = (AIR 1990 SC 1426), this Court held that the error apparent on the face of the award contemplated by Section 16(1)(c) and Section 30(c) of the Act is "an error of law" apparent on the face of the Award and not an error of fact and that the Arbitrator cannot ignore the law or misapply it in order to do what he thinks is just and reasonable. In President, Union of India v. Kalinga Construction Company (P) Limited, AIR 1971 SC 1646, it was held that the Court, in a proceeding to set aside the Award cannot exercise jurisdiction, as if on an appeal by re-examining and reappraising the evidence considered by the Arbitrator and come to the decision that the arbitrator was wrong (See also and ).
(13) In Union of India v. Jain Associates, , this Court held as follows:
"7. In K.P. Poulose v. State of Kerala, , this Court held that misconduct under Section 30(a) does not connote a moral lapse. It comprises of legal misconduct which is complete if the Arbitrator, on the face of the Award, arrives at an inconsistent conclusion even on his own finding, by ignoring material documents which would throw abundant light on the controversy and in arriving at a just and fair decision. It is in this sense that the Arbitrator has misconducted the proceedings in the case. In that case the omission to consider the material documents to resolve the controversy was held to suffer from manifest error apparent ex facie. The award was accordingly quashed. In Dandasi Sahu v. State of Orissa , this Court held that the arbitrator need not give any reasons. The award could be impeached only in limited circumstances as provided under Sections 16 and 30 of the Act. If the award is disproportionately high having regard to the original claim made and the totality of the circumstances it would certainly be a case of non-application of mind amounting to legal misconduct and it is not possible to set aside only invalid party while retaining the valid part. In other words the doctrine of severability was held inapplicable in such a situation. It is, therefore, clear that the word misconduct in Section 30(a) does not necessarily comprehend or include misconduct of fraudulent or improper conduct or moral lapse but does comprehend and include actions on the part of the Arbitrator, which on the face of the Award, are opposed to all rational and reasonable principles resulting in excessive Award or unjust result or the like circumstances which tend to show non-application of the mind to the material facts placed before the Arbitrator or Umpire. In truth it points to fact that the Arbitrator or Umpire had not applied his mind and not adjudicated upon the matter, although the Award professes to determine them. Such situation would amount to misconduct. In other words, if the Arbitrator or Umpire is found to have not applied his mind to the matters in controversy and yet, has adjudicated upon those matters in law, there can be no adjudication made on them. The Arbitrator/Umpire may not be guilty of any act which can possible be construed as indicative or partiality of unfairness. Misconduct is often used, in a technical sense denoting irregularity and not guilty of any moral turpitude, that is, in the sense of non-application of the mind to the relevant aspects of the dispute in its adjudication. In K.V. George v. Secretary to Government, Water and Power Department, Tirvandrum, , this Court held that the arbitrator had committed misconduct in the proceedings by making an award without adjudicating the counter-claim made by the respondent. In Indian Oil Corporation Limited v. Amritsar Gas Service, , the counterclaim was rejected on the ground of delay and non-consideration of the claim, it was held, constituted an error on the face of the Award."
(14) It is also, by now, well settled that an Arbitrator is not a conciliator and his duty is to decide the disputes submitted to him according to the legal rights of the parties and not according to what he may consider it to be fair and reasonable. Arbitrator was held not entitled to ignore the law or misapply it and cannot also act arbitrarily, irrationally, capriciously or independently of the contract (See Rajasthan State Mines and Minerals Limited v. Eastern Engineering Enterprises). If there are two equally possible or plausible views or interpretations, it was considered to be legitimate for the Arbitrator to accept one or the other of the available interpretations. It would be difficult for the Courts to either exhaustively define the word 'misconduct' or likewise enumerate the line of cases in which alone interference either could or could not be made. Courts of law have a duty and obligation in order to maintain purity of standards and preserve full faith and credit as well as to inspire confidence in alternate dispute redressal method of arbitration, when on the face of the Award it is shown to be based upon a proposition of law which is unsound or findings recorded which are absurd or so unreasonably and irrational that no reasonable or right thinking person or authority could have reasonably come to such a conclusion on the basis of the materials on record or the governing position of law to interfere. So far as the case before us is concerned, the reference to the Arbitrator is found to be a general reference to adjudicate upon the disputes relating to the alleged termination of the agreement by the State and not a specific reference on any particular question and consequently, if it is shown or substantiated to be erroneous on the face of it, the Award must be set aside."

18. The Supreme Court in Food Corporation of India v. Joginderpal Mohinderpal, , observed thus:

"Therefore, arbitration as a mode for settlement of disputes between the parties has a tradition in India. It has a social purpose to fulfil today. It has a great urgency today when there has been an explosion of litigations in the Courts of law established by the sovereign power. New rights created, or awareness of these rights, the erosion of faith in the intrinsic sense of fairness of men, intolerant and uncompromising attitudes are all the factors which block our Courts. The Courts are full of litigations, which are pending for long time. Therefore, it should be the endeavour of those who are interested in the administration of justice to help settlement by arbitration, if possible. It has also a social efficacy being the decision by the consent of the parties. It has greater scope of acceptance today when there is a certain erosion of faith in view of the failure to appreciate the functions of the Courts of law. It has also the advantage of not only quickness of decision but of simplicity of procedure. But in proceedings of arbitration there must be adherence to justice, equity) law and fair play in actions. However, the proceedings of arbitration must adhere to the principles of natural justice and must be in consonance with such practice and procedure which will lead to a proper resolution of the dispute and create confidence of the people for whose benefit these processes are resorted to. It is, therefore, the function of Courts of law to oversee that the Arbitrators act within the norms of justice. Once they do so and the Award is clear, just arid fair, the Courts should, as far as possible, give effect to the Award of the parties and make the parties compel to adhere to and obey the decision of then chosen adjudicator. It is in this perspective that one should view the scope and limit of correction by the Court of an Award made by the Arbitrator. We should make the law of Arbitration simple, less technical and more responsible to the actual realities of the situation, but must be responsive to the canons of justice and fair play and make the arbitrator adhere to such process and norms which will create confidence, not only by doing justice between the parties, but by creating a sense that justice appears to have been done. Sections 30 and 33 of the Act provide for the grounds on which an Award of the Arbitrator can be set aside. These were mainly, until recent changes made by statutory laws in England, in consonance with the English principles of Common Law as adopted in India. So far as the material of the present purpose is concerned, as award of the Arbitrator can only be interfered with or set aside or modified within the four corners of the procedure provided by the Act. It is necessary to find whether the arbitrator has misconducted himself or the proceedings legally in the sense whether the Arbitrator has gone contrary to the terms of reference between the parties or whether the Arbitrator has committed any error of law apparent on the face of the Award. It is necessary to emphasise that these are grounds for setting aside the Award but these are separate and distinct grounds. Halsbury's laws of England, Vol. 24th ed., para 623 reiterates that an Arbitrators award may be set aside for error of law appearing on the face of it. Though this jurisdiction is not to be lightly exercised. The award can also be set aside if, inter alia, the arbitrator has misconducted himself or the proceedings. It is difficult to give an exhaustive definition what may amount to a misconduct on the part of the Arbitrator. This is discussed in Halsbury's Laws of England (supra). It is not misconduct on the part of an Arbitrator to come to an erroneous decision, whether his error is one of fact or law, and whether or not his findings of fact are supported by evidence See the observations of Russell on Arbitration, 20th edn., page 422."
19. In Kapoor Nilokheri Co-operative Dairy Farm Society Limited v. Union of India, , it was held that where an Arbitrator is called upon to decide the effect of the agreement, he is really to decide a question of law i.e., of interpreting the agreement and hence his decision is not open to challenge. This was a case of reasoned Award and the reference was to a specific question of law and since the reference was a specific question of law, the decision of the Arbitrator was held not open to challenge.

20. In Continental Construction Company Limited v. State of Madhya Pradesh, (1998) 3 SCC 82, the Supreme Court observed as follows:

"If no specific question of law is referred, the decision of the Arbitrator on that question is not final however much it may be within his jurisdiction and indeed essential for him to decide the question incidentally. The Arbitrator is not a conciliator and cannot ignore the law or misapply it in order to do what he thinks is just and reasonable. The Arbitrator is a Tribunal selected by the parties to decide their disputes according to law and so is bound to follow and apply the law, and if he does not he can be set right by the Court provided his error appears on the face of the Award."
21. In Sudarshan Trading Company v. Government of Kerala, , the Supreme Court observed as follows:

"It is not open to the Court to probe the mental process of the Arbitrator and speculate', where no reasons are giving by the Arbitrator, as to what impelled the Arbitrator to arrive at his conclusion. In the instant case the Arbitrator has merely set out the claims and given the history of the claims and then Awarded certain amount. He has not spoken his mind indicating why he has done what he has done; he has narrated only how he came to make the Award. In absence of any reasons for making the award, it is not open to the Court to interfere with the award. Furthermore, in any event, reasonableness of the reasons given by the Arbitrator, cannot be challenged. Appraisement of evidence by the Arbitrator is never a matter which the Court questions and considers. If the parties have selected their own forum, the deciding forum must be conceded the power of appraisement of the evidence. The Arbitrator is the sole judge of the quality as well as the quantity of evidence and it will not be for the Court to take upon itself the task of being a judge on the evidence before the Arbitrator.
Once there is dispute as to the contract, what is the interpretation of that contract, is a matter for the Arbitrator and on which Court cannot substitute its own decision. If on a view taken of a contract, the decision of the Arbitrator on certain amounts awarded, is a possible view though perhaps not the only correct view, the award cannot be examined by the Court. Therefore, the High Court had no jurisdiction to examine the different items awarded clause by clause by the Arbitrator and to hold that under the contract these were not sustainable in the facts found by the Arbitrator.
In the instant case, the Court had examined the different claims not to find out whether these claims were within the disputes referable to the Arbitrator, but to find out whether in arriving at the decision, the Arbitrator had acted correctly or incorrectly. Thus, the Court had no jurisdiction to do, namely, substitution of its own evaluation of the conclusion of law or fact to come to the conclusion that the Arbitrator had acted contrary to the bargain between the parties. Whether a particular amount was liable to be paid or damages liable to be sustained, was a decision within the competency of the Arbitrator. By purporting to construe the contract the Court could not take upon itself the burden of saying that this was contrary to the contract and, as such, beyond jurisdiction. It has to be determined that there is a distinction between disputes as to the jurisdiction of the Arbitrator and the disputes as to in what way that jurisdiction should be exercise. There may be a conflict as to the power of the Arbitrator to grant a particular remedy."
22. It has been held by the Supreme Court that reasonableness of the reasons assigned by the learned Arbitrator cannot be gone into unless the award is per se preposterous or absurd. Even the appeasement of evidence by the Arbitrator is beyond the scanning powers of the Court.

23. In Hindustan Construction Company Limited v. State of J&K, , the Supreme Court observed as follows:

"The present case is precisely one of the same type as the one before the Judicial Committee. The arbitrators have just awarded amounts to the Contractor, against its claim, on Item Nos. 2 and 5. They make no reference to the contract or any of its clauses. Yet the State contends that since these are items covered by certain terms of the contract, Court should look at those terms and interpret them, if this done it is said, the Stats interpretation is bound to be accepted and that apparently accepted by the arbitrators will be found to be wrong. It is this contention that has been accepted. This cannot be done. Even if, in fact, the Arbitrators had interpreted the relevant clauses of the contract in making their Award on the impugned items and even if the interpretation is erroneous, the Court cannot touch the Award as it is within the jurisdiction of the arbitrators to interpret the contract. Whether the interpretation is right or wrong, the parties will be bound; only if they set out their line of interpretation in the Award and that is found erroneous can the Court interfere." .
24. Again in State of Rajasthan v. Poori Construction Company Limited, , the Supreme Court considered the scope of interference. It observed thus:

"By and large the Courts have disfavoured interference with arbitration Award on account of error of law and fact on the scope of misappreciation and misreading of the materials on record and have shown definite inclination to preserve the Awards as far as possible. In recent times, error in law and fact in basing an Award has not been given the wide immunity as enjoyed earlier, by expanding the import and implication of "legal misconduct" of an Arbitrator so that Award by the Arbitrator does not perpetrate gross miscarriage of justice and the same is not reduced to mockery of a fair decision of the lis between the parties to arbitration. However, in the anxiety to render justice to the party to arbitration, the Court should not reappraise the evidence intrinsically with a close scrutiny for finding out that the conclusion drawn from some facts, by the Arbitrator is, according to the understanding of the Court, erroneous. Such exercise of power which can be exercised by an Appellate Court with power to reverse the finding of fact, is alien to the scope and ambit of challenge of an Award under the Arbitration Act. If a question of law is referred to Arbitrator and the Arbitrator comes to a conclusion, it is not open to challenge the award on the ground that an alternative view of law is possible. Even if it is assumed that on the materials on record, a different view could have been taken and the Arbitrators have failed to consider the documents and materials on record in their proper perspective, the Award is not liable to be struck down in view of judicial decisions referred to hereinbefore. Error apparent on the face of the record does not mean that on closer scrutiny of the import of documents and materials on record, the finding made by the Arbitrator may be held to be erroneous. An error of law or fact committed by an Arbitrator by itself does not constitute misconduct warranting interference with the Award."
25. In Rajathan State Mines and Minerals Limited v. Eastern Engineering Enterprises, , the Supreme Court observed as follows:

"It is settled law that the Arbitrator is the creature of the contract between the parties and hence if he ignores the specific terms of the contract, it would be a question of jurisdiction error which could be corrected by the Court and for that limited purpose agreement is required to be considered. For deciding whether the Arbitrator has exceeded his, jurisdiction reference to the terms of the contract is a must it is true that Arbitration Clause 74 is very widely worded, therefore, the dispute was required to be referred to the arbitrator. Hence, the Award passed by the arbitrator cannot be said to be without jurisdiction but, at the same time, it is apparent that he has exceeded his jurisdiction by ignoring the specific stipulations in the agreement which prohibit entertaining of the claims made by the Contractor."
26. In U.P. State Electricity Board v. Searsole Chemicals Limited, , the Supreme Court held thus;

"When the Arbitrators have applied their mind to the pleadings, the evidence adduced before them and the terms of the contract, we do not think, it is within our scope to reappraise the matter as if this were an appeal, and it is clear that where two views are possible - in this case there is no such scope - the view taken by the Arbitrators would prevail."
27. It is also to be noted that the approach of the Court towards the Award should be always be supported if it is reasonably possible rather than to destroy by calling as illegal (See Smt. Santha Sila Devi v. Dhirendra Nath Sen, ).

Validity and Interpretation of Clause 59 read with Clause 73 of P.S. to APDSS.

28. Coming to the interpretation of Clause 59 vis-a-vis Clause 73, there are number of conflicting decisions of various Division Benches of this Court. But, however, these decisions were rendered in the wake of the facts of a particular case with reference to the terms and conditions of the contract.

29. The issue that arises for consideration is the applicability of the Clause 59. In fact in most of the arbitration cases, the Government is projecting Clause 59 as a penumbral protection to avoid the consequences of delays/defaults from any cause whatsoever. Moreover, in none of the cases dealt with by the Supreme Court and the Division Benches except Raghunadha Roa's case (1988 (1) ALT 461), the validity and interpretation of Clause 59 was considered. Therefore, it became necessary for us to consider in detail the parameters and effect of this P.S.59.

30. For proper appreciation of the case, Clauses 59 and 73 of P.S. to APDSS are necessary and both the clauses are extracted below:

"59. Delays and extension of time :--No claims for compensation on account of delays or hindrances to the work from any cause whatever shall lie, except as hereinafter defined. Reasonable extension of time will be allowed by the Executive Engineer or by the office competent to sanction the extension for unavoidable delays, such as may result from causes, which, in the opinion of the Executive Engineer, are undoubtedly beyond the control of the Contractor. The Executive Engineer shall assess the period of delay or hindrance caused by any written instructions issued by him, at twenty five per cent in excess of the actual working period so lost.
In the event of the Executive Engineer failing to issue necessary instructions and thereby causing delay and hindrance to the Contractor, the latter shall have the right to claim an assessment of such delay by the Superintending Engineer of the Circle whose decision will be final and binding. The Contractor shall lodge in writing with the Executive Engineer a statement of claim for any delay or hindrance referred to above, within fourteen days from its commencement, otherwise no extension of time will be allowed.
Whenever authorized alterations or additions made during the progress of the work are of such a nature in the opinion of the Executive Engineer as to justify an extension of time in consequences thereof, such extension will be granted in writing by the Executive Engineer or other competent authority when ordering such alterations or additions.
73. Arbitration:--In case of any dispute or difference between the parties to the contract either during the progress or after the completion of the works or after the determination, abandonment, or breach of the contract, as the interpretation of the contract, or as to any matter or thing arising thereunder except as to the matters left to the sole discretion of the Executive Engineer under Clauses 20, 22, 27(c), 29, 36, 37 and 40 of the preliminary specification or as to the withholding by the Executive Engineer of payment of any bill to which the Contractor may claim to be entitled, then either party shall forthwith give to the other notice of such dispute or difference, and such dispute or difference shall be and is hereby referred to the arbitration of the Superintending Engineer of the nominated circle mentioned in the "Articles of Agreement" (hereinafter called the "Arbitrator") and the Award of such Arbitrator shall be final and binding of the parties unless contested by either party in a Court of law. Provided however that in cases where the Executive Engineer has entered into the contract on behalf of the Governor, the dispute or difference shall, in the first instance, be referred by or through the Executive Engineer to the Superintending Engineers of the circle, in which the work lies and his decision thereon obtained before referring such dispute or difference to arbitration under this clause. Progress of the work shall not be suspended or delayed on account of the reference of any dispute or difference to the Superintending Engineer of the circle in which the work lies or to arbitration under this clause. The decision of the Executive Engineer or the Superintending Engineer of the circle in which the work lies, as the case may be on such dispute or difference shall be conclusive until reversed by the Superintending Engineer or the Arbitrator. Either party may within a period which shall be fixed by the Arbitrator, file before the Arbitrator a statement of the case and also all the documents relating to or having a bearing on the case. The Arbitrator shall see that the Award is passed, if reasonably possible, within a period of four months from the date of his entering upon the reference, but if any extension of that period is considered by him to be necessary, either suo motu or on the application of either party to the reference, the parties hereby agree and consent to such extension as the Arbitrator may from time to time consider reasonably necessary, and any such extension shall forthwith be communicated by him in writing to each of the parties hereto. The Arbitrator shall not be bound to observe the ordinary rules of procedure applicable to trials before Judicial Tribunals not to hear to receive formal evidence but may pass on award on the documents or statements of the case filed by both the parties under or on personal inspection. The Arbitrator shall have power to view the subject-matter of the dispute with or without the parties or their agents. The Arbitrator shall also have power to open up, review and revise any certificate, opinion decision, requisition or notice, save in regard to the matters expressly excepted and to determine all matters in dispute which shall be submitted to him, and of which notice shall have been given as aforesaid, in the same manner as if no such certificate, opinion, decision, requisition or notice had been given upon every any such reference the costs of any incidental to the reference and Award respectively shall be in the discretion of the Arbitrator, subject to the condition that the amount of such cost to be divided to either party shall not in respect of, i.e., monitory claim exceed the percentage set out below of any such Award irrespective to the actual fees costs and expense incurred by either party; provided that where a monitary claim is disallowed in full, the said percentage shall be calculated on the amount of the claim. The Arbitrator may determine the amount of the costs to be awarded or direct the same to be taxed as between solicitor and client or a party and party and shall direct by whom and to whom and in what manner the same shall be borne and paid.
The percentage above referred to in this clause are 5 per cent on any such monitary award which does not exceeds Rs. 10,000/-, 3 performed cent on the next Rs. 40,000/-or any part thereof 2 per cent on the next Rs. 50,000/- or any part thereof and 1 per cent on any excess over Rs. 1,00,000/-:
Provided that Government shall not be liable to any claim in respect of any such dispute or difference until liabilities, and the amount referred to is decided by the Arbitrator:
Provided that payment to the Contractor based on the arbitration award shall be made only after acceptance of the Award by the Chief Engineer if the value of the award is less than Rs. 20,000/- be and the Government if the value is Rs. 20,000 above."
31. While dealing with Clause 59, the following points would arise for determination:

(a) Whether Clause 59 imposes arbitrary or unreasonable condition?
(b) Whether it is hit by the provisions of Contract Act?
(c) Assuming it is valid clause, how it has to be construed and interpreted ?
(d) How this clause was considered under various judgments?
(e) What are the final conclusions?
32. Issues (a) and (b) can be decided jointly.

33. The meaning of the words "compensation" and "damages" is spelt out in various law dictionaries.

34. Meaning of word 'compensation' in Black's Law Dictionary 6th Edn. reads thus:

"Compensation. Indemnification; payment of damages; making amends; making whole; giving an equivalent or substitute of equal value. That which is necessary to restore an injured party to his former position. Remuneration for services rendered whether in a salary, fees, or commissions. Consideration or price of a privilege purchased.
Equivalent in money for a loss sustained; equivalent given for property taken or for an injury done to another; giving back an equivalent in either money which is but the measure of value, or in actual value otherwise conferred; recompense in value; recompense or reward for some loss, injury, or service, especially when it is given by statute; remuneration for the injury directly and proximately caused by a breach of contract or duty; remuneration or satisfaction for injury or damage of every description (including medical expenses). An act which a Court Orders to be done, or money which a Court or other Tribunal Orders to be paid, by a person whose acts or omissions have caused loss or injury to another, in order that thereby the person damnified may receive equal value for his loss, or be made whole in respect of his injury. Hughson Condensed Milk Co. v. State Board of Equalization, 23 Cal.App. 2d 281, 73 P.2d 290, 292. See also Damages."
Similarly, the word 'damages' has been explained:

"Damages. A pecuniary compensation or indemnity, which may be recovered in the Courts by any person who has suffered loss, detriment, or injury, whether to his person, property, or rights, through the unlawful act or omission or negligence of another. A sum of money awarded to a person injured by the tort of another. Restatement, Second, Torts 12A. Money compensation sought or awarded as a remedy for a breach of contract or for tortuous acts.
Damages may be compensatory or punitive according to whether they are awarded as the measure of actual loss suffered or as punishment for outrageous conduct and to deter future transgressions. Nominal damages are awarded for the vindication of a right where no real loss or injury can be proved. Generally, punitive or exemplary damages are awarded only if compensatory or actual damages have been sustained."
35. In Merrian Webster's Dictionary of Law, the meaning of the word "compensation" is "something that makes up for a loss or that is received for breach of contract". But, however, there is distinction between these two connotations viz., damages and compensation. We are not inclined to go into this aspect inasmuch as, what is stipulated in P.S. 59 is the compensation and not the damages. Therefore, it has to be only interpreted that compensation means "giving an equal or substitute of equal value or that, which is necessary to restore an injured party to his former possession."

36. Under Section 23 of the Contract Act, the consideration and object of an agreement is lawful unless it is vitiated by the factors as contained in the said Section. Section reads thus:

"SECTION 23 What considerations and objects are lawful and what not The consideration or object of an agreement is lawful, unless it is forbidden by law; or is of such a nature that, if permitted, it would defeat the provisions of any law; of is fraudulent; or involves or implies injury to the person or property of another; or the Court regards it as immoral, or opposed to public policy. In each of these cases, the consideration or object of an agreement is said to be unlawful. Every agreement of which the object or consideration is unlawful is void."
37. Section 73 of the Contract Act postulates thus:

"where a contract has been, broken, the party who suffers by such breach is entitled to receive, from the party who has broken the contract, compensation for any or damage caused to him thereby, which naturally arose in the usual course of things from such breach, or which the parties knew, when they made the contract, to be likely to result from the breach of it.
Such compensation is not to be given for any remote and indirect loss or damage sustained by reason of the breach."
38. Therefore, it has to be considered whether the provisions stipulating avoidance of compensation damages are unlawful. As per Section 73, it is imperative that a party who breaches the contract is liable to pay compensation. Hence, a clause in the contract making the person who breaches the contract not liable for compensation run contrary to Section 73. Under Section 23 the object of an agreement is lawful unless, among other stipulations, is of such a nature that if such an agreement is permitted it would defeat the provision of law. Therefore, Clause 59 being contrary to Section 73 can be said to fall outside in the category of unlawful agreement.

39. It is well settled that no agreement can override the statutory provisions and such an agreement is void, ab initio. But, however, this is subject to the principle of waiver and acquiescence under certain circumstances. While it is open for the party to waive his individual or personal right and acquiesce the same, the said waiver must be conscious and voluntary. However, the principle of waiver is not applicable in case of waiver of public rights or fundamental rights under the Constitution.

40. On the question of waiver with reference to Clause 59, the Division Bench of this Court in M. Ganga Reddy v. State of A.P., 1996 (3) ALD 434 (DB), observed as follows:

"It is well settled that a waiver of right may be oral or written or inferred from conduct. Waiver can also arise from a promise of forbearance to enforce a term of the contract. The proposition is succinctly stated in Chitty on Contracts (Volume-1, 25th Edn.) at para 1495 as follows:
"Waiver may also be held to have occurred, if without any request, one party represents to the other that he will forbear to enforce or rely on a term of the contract to be performed or observed by the other party, and the other party acts in reliance on that representation;
Again at Para 1497, it is stated that:
"The party who forbears will be bound by the waiver and cannot setup the original terms of the agreement. If, by words or conduct, he has agreed or led the other party to believe that he will accept performance at a later date than or in a different manner from that provided in the contract, he will not be able to refuse that performance when tendered."
What is said at para 1498 is also apposite:

"Where one party has induced the other party to accede to his request, the party seeking the forbearance will not be permitted to repudiate the waiver and to rely on the letter of the agreement."
This is exactly the situation here as apparent from the documents referred to or forming part of the Award. Though there must be a promise or representation to attract the principle of waiver as pointed out in the Law of Contract by Treitel (8th Edition, at page 102), the promise need not be express and direct.).

"There must be a promise (or an assurance or representation in the nature of a promise) which is intended to affect the legal relationship between the parties and which indicates that the promisor will not insist on his strict legal rights, arising out of that relationship, against the promisee. Here, as elsewhere, the law applies an objective test. It is enough if the promise induces the promisee reasonably to believe that the other party will not insist on his strict legal rights."
However, "to bring the equitable doctrine into operation, the promise or representation must be 'clear' or unequivocal, or 'precise and unambiguous.'"

On the facts of the case, it can be reasonably said that there was waiver of the right to enforce Clause 59. Alternatively, we hold that the Arbitrator's finding that there was an assurance to pay the extra rates cannot be said to be perverse or vitiated by an error of law apparent on the face of the award. The assurance may not be direct or express but it is possible to take the view that there was an implied promise to pay the extra rates for the work done beyond the agreement period notwithstanding Clause 59. The promise had emanated from a competent officer who signed the agreement itself. If the view taken by the Arbitrator is reasonably possible or plausible, we cannot interfere with the Award on the ground of error apparent on the face of the Award. We, therefore, uphold the Award in regard to Claim No. 1(e) and the learned Additional Judge, City Civil Court, was justified in confirming the award on this item."
41. An agreement offending a statute or public policy or forbidden by law is not merely void, but it is invalid from vitality. It cannot become valid even if the parties thereto agreed to it. The concept that an agreement may be void in relation to a specified person and may be valid or voidable between the parties thereto is not applicable to an agreement the formation whereof law interdicts or which falls within the prohibitory range of Section 23 of the Contract Act. Thus, no legal relations are created by the agreement offending a statute or public policy enabling neither party to enforce the agreement. (See: Nutan Kumar v. IInd Additional District Judge, ).

42. Similarly, if a contract is expressly prohibited by laws, the contract is void, ab initio and cannot be enforced at all. The contract could be that which is in contravention of law to safeguard the revenue may or may not be void according to the object, is to make contravention expensive or prohibited. In the later case, it would be void. (See CIT Mysore v. Union of India, , P. Bughaiah v. K. Chinnapa Reddy, etc.) Statutes relating to Excise, Opium Act, Food Control Act are examples of statutes which prohibit transactions not only for the purpose gaining revenue, but in the interest of public health, morality or welfare and infringement to their provisions will make an agreement unlawful. (See Indian Contract Act - Pollack and Mullah 12th Edn. P.622)

43. P.S. 59 also came up for consideration before this Court in the case reported in Y. Raghunadha Rao v. State of A.P., 1988 (1) ALT 461.

44. Dealing with the constitutional validity of this clause Justice K. Ramawamy (as he then was) held that opening part of Sub-clause (1) of Clause 59 and the supplementary specifications relieving the liability of the State were arbitrary, unreasonable, unjust and unconscionable.

45. Where a party suffers by a breach of contract, he is entitled, at all events, to claim damages therefore, though in some cases, he may be entitled to the equitable reliefs. When there is a breach of contract, the party, who commits the breach does not co instanta incur any peculiar obligation or liability nor does party complaining of the breach become entitled to a debt or amount due from the other party. The only right, which he has, is the right to sue for damages for the injury he has sustained. He gets the compensation as a result of the fiat of the contract and not by reason of any existing obligation on the part of the person in breach. The Court in the first instance must decide that the defendant is liable and then proceed to assess what that liability is. A claim for damages for breach of contract, is, therefore, not a claim for some presently due and payable. The Court is competent to award reasonable compensation in case of breach, even if no actual damage is proved or shown to have been suffered in consequence of breach of contract. (See: Union of India v. Raman Iron Foundary, and Maula Bux v. Union of India, .)

46. The principle on which the damages were usually awarded is stated by Parke B. in Robison v. Harman, (1848) 154 ER 363 and Anglia Television Limited v. Reddy, (1971) 1 All E.R. 690, as follows:

"The rule of the common law is that where a party sustains a loss by reason of a breach of contract, he is, so far as money can do it, to be placed in the same situation with respect to damages, as if the contract had been performed."
47. With regard to the measure of damages, the governing principle is to effect a restitutio in integrant, in regard to the actionable damage, namely the damage which occurs in the ordinary course of things. It is as if the plaintiff is placed in the position he would have been in, had the contractual obligation been performed. This rule was propounded in Hadley v. Baxendale (9 Exch. 341 at Page 355), The rule is "Where to parties have made a contract which one of them has broken, the damages which the other party ought to receive in respect of such breach should be such as may be fairly and reasonably be considered either (arising naturally, i.e., according to the usual course of things, from such breach of contract itself, or (2) such as may reasonably be supposed to have been in the contemplation of both parties, at the time they made the contract, as the probable result of the breach of it. If the special circumstances under which the contract was actually made were communicated by the Plaintiffs to the defendants, and thus known to both parties, the damages resulting from the breach, which they would reasonably contemplate, would be the injury which would ordinarily follow from a breach of contract under these special circumstances so known and communicated. On the other hand, if these special circumstances were wholly unknown to the party breaking the contract, he, at the most, could only be supposed to have had in his contemplation the amount of injury which would arise generally, and in the great; multitude of cases not affected by an special circumstances, from such a breach of contract. For, had the special circumstances been known, the parties might have specially provided for the breach of contract by special terms as to the damages in that case; and of this advantage it would be very unjust to deprive them. Therefore, in the absence of special circumstances known to the defendant, on the basis of which the contract was made is only liable for such loss as to the flow from the breach in the ordinary circumstances.

48. In Dwarak Das v. State of M.P., , it was held that where the appellant-Contractor claimed damages of Rs. 20,000/- is 10% of Rs. 2 lakhs which is the value as against the respondent Government for having illegally rescinding the contract, the claim cannot be disallowed on the ground that there was no material on record to show that the appellant has actually suffered loss to the extent of claim made.

49. Where one of the parties to the contract has right to perform the contract in one of the two ways and there is a breach, the damages will be assessed on the basis of his minimum legal obligation. The law presumed that the contract would have been performed in the way most beneficial to him and damages will be assessed on this basis. That is, damages are based on the mode of performance least profitable to the plaintiff and least burdensome to the defendant. (See : Withers v. General Theatre Corporation Limited, (1933) 2 K.B. 536 and The Mithalis Angelas, 1971 (1) Q.B. 164).

50. In case of employment contract between the employer and employee, there is a universal tendency on the part of the employer to insert those terms, which are favourable to him in a printed and standard form, leaving no real meaningful choice to the employee except to give assent to all such terms. In such a situation the parties cannot said to be in even position possessing equal bargaining power. Where the parties are put on unequal terms the standard form of contract cannot be said to be the subject-matter of negotiation between the parties and the same is said to have been dictated by the party whose higher bargaining power enable him to do so. (See Unikool Bottlers v. Dhillon Cool Drinks, Pepsi Food Limited, ).

51. Similarly, in service contracts, the consent of the employee to the clause empowering the employer to terminate the services of the employee within three months notice or in lieu of it three months salary appears to have been obtained by means of undue influence. But in fact such a clause cannot be brought under Section 16(1) of the Contract Act but they should be denounced under Section 23 being opposed to public policy. Where a standard form of contract is entered into by the Government or its instrumentality with a private person containing unreasonable, unfair and irrational terms, such terms cannot be binding being opposed to public policy, since the other party who is a weaker party accepting the dotted line contract neither have the power to bargain or to assume to have equal bargaining power. (See LIC of India v. Consumer Education and Research Centre, (1995) 2 SCC 482).

52. In the same zone, Rule 9 of Service Discipline and Appeals of 1979 empowering the Corporation to terminate the services of the permanent employees with three months notice was held to be unfair, unreasonable and unconscionable and opposed to public policy. (See : Central Inland Transport Corporation Limited v. Brojo Nath, ).

53. So also similar provision was struck down in Delhi Transport Corporation v. D.T.C. Mazdoor Sangh, , as is unreasonable and being opposed to public policy.

54. Therefore, where the dotted line contracts are concluded between the Government or its instrumentalities with private persons containing unreasonable, unfair and irrational terms purporting to override the provisions of the Contract Act or purporting to restrict its liability unreasonably or arbitrarily amounts to opposed to public policy.

55. Admittedly, in the instant case the Contractor is expected to commence the work only after the site is handed over. Therefore, handing over of the site is a sine qua non for performance of the contract and it is virtually in the realm of reciprocal promises.

56. Under Section 54 of the Contract Act, when a contract consisting of reciprocal promises, one of them cannot be performed or that its performance cannot be claimed till the other has performed and the promisor of the promise fails to perform it, such promisor cannot claim the performance of the reciprocal promise and must make compensation to the other party to the contract for any loss which such other party may sustain by non-performance of the contract. Moreover, it is not possible for the Contractor to commence the work unless the site is handed over without any obstructions. The law does not compel a man to do that which he cannot possibly perform (Lex non cogit Ad. Impossibilia). Thus, when the performance of the contract cannot be achieved by law, the same cannot be made possible through contract itself. Applying the same principle, in the instant case, when once the Contractor is not expected to commence the work unless the site is handed over, it amounts to the promisor not performing his initial obligation and therefore, it is incumbent on his part to compensate the other party for any loss which other party may sustain. In such a situation, this provision of Clause 59 cannot come in the way and the same cannot be given effect to. Even if the said clause is considered with reference to 55, result would be the same. Of course, we will discuss the effect of the decision of the Division Bench in Associated Company's case. Section 55 reads thus:

"Section 55 effect of failure to perform at fixed time, in contract in which time is essential When a party to a contract promises to do a certain thing at or before a specified time, or certain things at or before specified times, and fails to do any such tiling at or before the specified time, the contract, or so much of it as has not been performed, becomes voidable at the option of the promise, if the intention of the parties was that time should be of the essence of the contract. Effect of such failure when time is not essential - If it was not the intention of the parties that time should be of the essence of the contract, the contract does not become voidable by the failure to do such thing at or before the specified time; but the promisee is entitled to compensation from the promisor for any loss occasioned to him by such failure. Effect of acceptance of performance at time other than that agreed upon. If, in case of a contract voidable on account of the promisor's failure to perform his promise at the time agreed, the promisee accepts performance of such promise at any time other than that agreed, the promisee cannot claim compensation for any loss occasioned by the non-preformance of the promise at the time agreed, unless, at the time of such acceptance, he gives notice to the promisor of his intention to do so."
57. Where the contracts specifically provides for the performance to take place within the stipulated time and that the time is the essence of the contract and contract is rescinded on account of the non-compliance of the terms, the Courts in the absence of conduct amounting the estoppels or waiver would not interfere to order specific performance. But, if the parties do not attach much importance to performance within a particular time, then, default in performance at the due date only entails a liability to compensate the other party. In such a case, it is incumbent on the party accepting performance beyond time, to give notice to the defaulter that he intends to claim compensation for non-performance in time. Therefore, what is required to be established is in case covered by Section 55 where the time is essence of the contract, it is open for the department to rescind the contract and recover the damages if any arising out of non-performance of the contract by the Contractor. But, when once the time is extended by the department, it has to be inferred that time was not made the essence of the contract. Moreover, the very insertion of Clause 59 itself indicates that time was not treated as essence of contract inasmuch as extention of time was permitted under Clause 59. Therefore, when such is the situation, the inescapable conclusion is that the contract executed between the Contractor and the department, time was not the essence of contract, but however, it, has to be completed within a reasonable time. Mere acceptance of extension of time is not ipso facto indication that the Contractor waived his right to compensation. But, at the same time, it has to be noted that the Department cannot take advantage of its own lapses to deny the rightful claim for compensation by the Contractor. These ingredients are very much present in the clause itself.

58. A wrongdoer cannot be rewarded. This approach cuts the very basic tenets of principles under common law jurisprudence in staking claim for delays/compensation. Therefore, considering the provision contained in Sections 23, 54, 55 and 73, we hold that Clause 59 cannot be pressed into surmise, to meet this kind of situations.

59. Another issue that falls for consideration is construction and interpretation to be placed on Clause 59?

60. Clause 59 contemplated extension of reasonable time. The expression "no claim for compensation for the delays or hindrances to the work from any cause whatsoever shall lie except......" has to be understood in the context of entire clause. As already held by this clause is unreasonable. But, yet, when the clause protecting a defaulting party is contained in the agreement, the same has to be interpreted strictly. Admittedly, the clause restricts the right of the Contractor to claim compensation for the delays, defaults occurred for any cause whatsoever. The words 'cause whatsoever' have to be assigned their proper meaning by correlating the words ''unavoidable delays and beyond the control of the Contractor. The delays/defects of the department cannot be said to be unavoidable delays beyond the control of the Contractor. If these expressions are properly construed and understood in the wake of underlying principle in engrafting Clause 59, we are of the considered opinion that the defaults/ delays/breaches of terms of contract on the part of the Department are not covered by this so-called portative umbrella. Otherwise, it leads to a very anomalous results. For instance, if the period of contact is one year, this clause will enable the department to extend the period for ten years for its own defaults and breaches yet it cannot contend that no compensation is payable except granting extension of time. It is one thing to say that the Contractor could rescind the contract, but yet when the Contractor obliges the department to prefer the work during the extended period, it would be unjust and unconscionable to say that he cannot be compensated.

61. In this regard, the maxim Nullus Commodum Capere Potest De Injuria Sua Propria: No man can take advantage of his own wrong.

This maxim is based on elementary principle.

62. It is contrary to justice that a party should avoid his own contract by his own wrong. Accordingly, "in a long series of decisions the Courts have construed clauses of forfeiture in leases, declaring in terms, however clear and strong, that they shall be void on breach of conditions by the lessees to mean that they shall be voidable only at the option of the lessors. The same rule of construction has been applied to other contracts, where a party bound by a condition has sought to take advantage of his own breach of it to annul the contract", and it is applicable even where the Legislature has imposed the condition, unless the scope and purpose; of the enactment be so opposed to the rule that it ought not to prevail (See : Davenport v. R.3 App. Cas. 115 at ps. 128 and 129).

63. It is moreover a sound principle that he who prevents a thing from being done shall not avail himself of the non-performance he has occasioned.

A wrong doer ought not to be permitted to make a profit out of his own wrong.

64. Therefore, the latches and defaults on the part of the department cannot be said to be the causes beyond the control of the Contractor. Admittedly, in the instant case it has been found that the defaults were wholly attributable to the department and the department has breached the contract. Hence, if the extension of the time granted on the ground of defaults and breaches of the terms of the contract, it cannot be said to be cause beyond the control of the Contractor and thus Clause 59 would be wholly inapplicable.

65. Another distinguishing factor which we notice is that it is open for the Executive Engineer to grant reasonable extension of time and that reasonable extention is correlated to the following stipulation:

66. The Executive Engineer shall assess the period of delay or hindrance cause by any written instructions issued by him, at 25% in excess of the actual work period so lost. Therefore, what is permissible under the clause is Executive Engineer is empowered to grant time 25% in excess of the actual working period, which is considered to be reasonable extension of time. To illustrate, in a contract where 12 months time is fixed for completion, the reasonable extension that could be granted by the Executive Engineer on the ground that the cause was beyond the control of the Contractor could only be three months and if the extension is granted beyond three months, Clause 59 becomes inapplicable, as the extension beyond 25% of the actual period becomes unreasonable extension and fully outside Clause 59.

67. Here also the reasons are obvious that the work is expected to be completed either within the fixed period or within the reasonable extended period. But, it cannot be extended for unimaginable or unreasonable period that would frustrate the contract. Obviously, in this case, the extensions were granted on the ground that the site could not be handed over within the time and that there were many obstacles such as Land Acquisition proceedings, change in the design and pattern and additional allotment of work of subways, non-removal of telephone lines, the place not being made available for construction as it was linked with the construction of other works etc. Even though the learned Arbitrator found that Clause 59 is not applicable as what was claimed was not the compensation, but the value for the work done for the extended period, but yet, we come to the conclusion that Clause 59 is not applicable on the basis of that the extension was not granted for the reasons beyond the control of the Contractor and that the extension of the time went beyond 25% of the actual working days. Thus, we record that Clause 59 is inapplicable where the extension was granted beyond 25% of actual working period.

68. It is held in Hind Construction Contractors v. State of Maharashtra, , that where in a contract between a State Government and a Contractor for construction of an aqueduct across a river within the stipulated period of 12 months, power was conferred upon the Executive Engineer to grant extension of time for completion of work on reasonable grounds and further provision was made for levying and recovering penalty compensation from the Contractor as specified rates for the unfinished work after the expiry of the fixed date, such provisions would excluded the inference that time was intended to be of the essence of contract. The rescission of such a contract on the part of the State Government without fixing any further period making time the essence and directing the Contractor to complete the work within such period, was clearly illegal and wrongful and, thereby, the State Government committed a breach of the contract with the result that the security deposit of the Contractor could not be forfeited.

69. It is also to be noted in this regard that the power to rescind the contract was available both with the Department and also the Contractor. The Department admittedly did not take the recourse to rescinding the contract, but on the other hand, granted extension fully realizing that the defaults were on the Government side. The Contractor standing on an unequal position has undertaken to continue the contract. Therefore, when once the time fixed under the contract has expired, normally the contract gets broken, but when once the extension is granted, which was agreed subject to certain rights of the Contractor, the contract gets resurrected. In the absence of conscious waiver of his rights by the Contractor on fresh terms and conditions, the same terms and conditions will normally continue to govern the field. But, when resurrection takes place, the Contractor cannot be said to claim the same value as if the work was executed within the originally agreed period, when the work was done beyond the period of agreement he cannot be denied the claim for the value of the work done by him by way of compensation on the basis of the rates prevailing during the relevant period when the work was completed. It is settled principle that a party to a contract cannot be in a better position by reason of his default than if he had fulfilled his obligations under the contract. It amounts the rewarding the wrongdoer, which is not permissible. Thus, we come to the conclusion that Clause 59 is inapplicable in cases where the defaults are attributable to the Department and also in cases where the extensions are granted for a unreasonable period of time.

70. The decision of the Division Bench referred to in State of A.P. v. Associated Engineering Enterprises, Hyderabad, 1989 (2) ALT 372 (DB), is distinguishable in many respects. In that case, the Contractor was fully aware that the site would be handed over subject to certain conditions. The Division Bench referred to those facts in paras 13 and 14 reads thus:

"Before proceeding further, it would be appropriate to refer to certain other relevant material. In his letter, dated 23-1-1970 the respondent-Contractor wrote to the Superintending Engineer, Eluru, stating inter alia: "12. We agreed that compensation need not be paid if the delay in handing over the site occupied by the Railway is not more than 3 months". It is clear that certain portions of the site which were to be handed over to the respondent were occupied by the Railway in connection with its own work; the agreement between the parties was that as soon as the Railway vacated its occupation, the site shall be handed over to the Contractor within three months. The next letter is dated 8-3-1970 from the Chief Engineer, PWD, Hyderabad, to the respondent, in which it was stated, inter alia, "12.(a) : In your letter reference (3) cited (reference is respondent's letter, dated 23-1-1970 referred to above), you have agreed for not claiming any compensation for the delay in handing over site at piers 14 to 21 on Kovvur side beyond middle of 71" if the delay is not more than 3 months. You are informed that the last 6 spans can be handed over in the beginning of 1972...... This letter is rather ambiguous It speaks of delivery of piers 14 to 21 "beyond middle of 1971". Suffice it to note that as soon as the Railways delivered possession of the said sites, they were to be handed over to the Contractor within three months.
The third letter is dated 13-3-1970 from the respondent to the Chief Engineer. In this letter it was stated, inter alia, "12(a): We note that the site for piers 14 to 21 on Kovvur side will be handed over in the beginning of 1972. Since there is a delay of 6 months in handing over the site, the time of completion of the work on Kovvur side will have to be extended by 6 months.........." This letter shows that the site for piers 14 to 21 on Kovvur side was to be delivered in the beginning of 1972, which meant a delay of six months over the time agreed earlier and in lieu thereof it was agreed that the period of contract shall be extended by six months."
71. What was claimed by the Contractor in the said case was the amount which was worked out on the basis of the rising consumer price index and also on account of the establishment of overhead charges. But, in the instant case it is a case for claim for the work done on the basis of the SSR rates prevailing at the relevant time for the work done beyond the agreement period and that is fully covered by the decision of the Division Bench reported in State of A.P. v. S. Shivaraj Reddy, 1988 (2) APLJ 465. Even the Division Bench while interpreting Section 55 observed as follows:

"According to this Section it was open to the respondent to avoid the contract on account of the Government's breach of promise to deliver the sites at a particular time; but, he did not choose to do so, and accepted the delivery of sites at a time other than what was agreed upon between them earlier. If so, he is precluded from claiming compensation for any loss occasioned by such delay, unless, of course, at the time of such delayed acceptance of the sites, he had given notice to the Government of his intention to claim compensation on that account. It must be remembered that this provision of law was specifically referred to, and relied upon in the counter filed by the Government to the respondent's claim before the Arbitrator. But, it is not brought to our notice that the Contractor had given such a notice (contemplated by the last sentence in Section 55). We must make it clear that we are not entering into the merits of the decision of the Arbitrator. What we are saying is that such a claim for compensation is barred by law, except in a particular specified situation-and inasmuch as such a particular specified situation is not present in this case, the claim for compensation is barred. It is well settled that an Arbitrator, while making his Award, has to act in accordance with law of the land, except in a case where a specific question of law is referred for his decision."
72. Admittedly, in the instant case when the extension was granted, it was made clear by the Contractor that he is accepting the extension reserving the right to claim for the losses. As can be seen from Ex.C-17 dated 24-7-1981 and Ex.C-26, dated 15.4.1982 and Ex.C-27 dated 23-5-1982 and Ex.C-46, dated 5-10-1984. Therefore, when it was made clear that the extension was accepted subject to the right of the Contractor to the claim losses or enhancement and it was open for the Department either to cancel or rescind the contract if they were not agreeable for such conditions, but having allowed the Contractor to complete the work during the extended period and without resorting to cancelling the contract, it would not be appropriate for the Department to contend that no compensation is payable. Further what was claimed is only the value of the work basing on the S.S.R. rates which was existing during the relevant period, instead of S.S.R rates which was existing as on the date of the concluding the agreement. Therefore, by this it is conclusively established that the Department has waived its right to pay the rates as existing at the time of execution of the agreement.

Integrity of the contract

73. Let us consider various judgments of this Court on Clause 59.

74. A Division Bench of this Court consisting of Justice B.P. Jeevan Reddy (as he then was) and Justice Neeladri Rao in AAO.677 of 1981 and CRP No. 385 of 1982, dated 19-4-1982 observed as follows:

"Coming to Clause 59 of the preliminary specifications of "APDSS" it provides that neither party to the Contractor shall claim compensation on account of delays or hindrances to work from any cause whatever." That the delays and hindrances contemplated by Clause 59 include the stoppage hindrances and delays on the part of the Department as well, is clear from the following sentence in this first part of the said clause, viz., "the Executive Engineer shall assess the period of delay or hindrances caused by any written instructions issued by him, at 25% in excess of the actual work period so lost". Indeed, the second para of the clause also contemplates delays and hindrances being caused on account of the failure of the Executive Engineer to issue necessary instructions. In such a case, the Contractor has a right to claim the assessment of such delay by the Superintending Engineer of the Circle, whose decision is declared to be final and binding on the parties. But, any such claim has to be lodged in writing to the executive Engineer within fourteen days of the commencement of such delay, or hindrances, as the case may be. We find it difficult, therefore, to say. that Clause 59 has no application to the present case. The words "from any cause whatever", occurring Clause 59, are wide enough to take in delays and hindrance of all types, caused by the Department, or arising from the other reasons, as the case may be. Thus, by virtue of Clause 59, the Contractor is precluded from claiming any compensation on account of delays or hindrances arising from any cause whatever, including those arising on account of the acts or omissions of the departmental authorities........"
75. In another case, the Division Bench of this Court reported in Chief Engineer, Panchayatraj Department v. B. Balaiah, 1985 (1) APLJ 224, held that inasmuch as the contract between the parties does not provide for payment of escalation charges, awarding an amount on account of escalation charges is in excess of the Arbitrator's jurisdiction, and is void. But, however, in later decision of the another Division Bench of this Court in State of A.P. v. S. Shivaraj Reddy, 1988 (2) APLJ 465, took a different view holding that in cases pertaining to the work done beyond the contract period compensation can be claimed. The Division Bench held that the Contractor must be paid as per the standard specification rates, for the reason that the Government had defaulted in handing over the site at the time agreed and thus it held that the claim is not barred by Clause 59 of APDSS. In the said case, the decision of the earlier Division Bench in CMA No. 677/81 and CRP No. 385/82, dated 19.4.1982 distinguished the same holding that was a case where the claim was for compensation, whereas in the case before them the claim was for payment as per standard specification rates as the site was not handed over to the Contractor beyond time. The Division Bench observed thus:

"In our view Section 59 has no application. It pertain to compensation. In the present case, we are concerned with the rates for the work done. The Contractor is not claiming any compensation for loss or damage or loss of profit which he would have made but for the delay committed by the Department. What is asked for here is that beyond the contractual date he must be paid as per the standard specification rates as the site was not handed over in time due to the fault of the Department itself. We do not think P.S. 59 has any application at all. The decision of the Division Bench referred to by the learned Government Pleader has as relevance in the present context. In this Division Bench case, the Contractor having agreed for reduction of rates and executing the final agreement, demanded escalation of rates complaining that the Department committed delays and defaults. The Government relied upon Clause 59 and Foot Note 7 of Schedule 'A' which prohibited payment of rates at the enhanced rates even during the extended period. The Division Bench negatived the claim of the Contractor on the ground that the Foot Note 7 is clear to the effect that the agreed rate should prevail even during the extended period of the agreement. The judgment of the Division Bench was more based on the specific prohibition contained in Foot Note 7 of Schedule 'A' of the agreement therein. There is no such clause in the present agreement. It is not a case of escalation of rates. Here the major portion of the site was handed over beyond the period of agreement during which period the cost of labour and other materials have gone up. Without the site was impossible for the Contractor to complete the work and what the Arbitrators have done is only to permit the Contractor to claim the rates prevalent as per the S.S.Rs. in force. In our view, it is not prohibited either under the APDSS Rules or by any clause in the agreement.........."
76. Again in State of A.P. v. Associated Engineering Enterprises, Hyderabad, 1989 (2) ALT 372 (DB), the matter came up before the another Division Bench consisting of Justice B.P. Jeevan Reddy (as he then was) and another learned Single Judge. Referring to the aforesaid decision the Division Bench observed that the decision in Shivaraj Reddy's case (supra) on facts it was distinguishable and it observed that :

"We must clarify that, so far as the case before us is concerned the claim of the respondent-Contractor is not for escalation of rates, nor is it a claim for payment of rates as per the standard specification rates in force for the period beyond the originally agreed contract period. If so, the decision in State of A.P. v. S. Shivaraj Reddy, 1988 (2) APLJ 224, has no application herein. In the case before us, the claim is a pure and simple claim for compensation. The amount claimed has been worked out on the basis of the rise in consumer price-index, and also on account of establishment and overhead charges. It would, therefore, be a case squarely governed by the principle of the decision in AAO No. 677/81 and CRP No. 385/82, dated 19.4.1982."
The Division Bench finally held thus:

"Applying the principal of the above decision to the facts of the case before us, it must be held that Clause 59 bars a claim for compensation on account of any delays or hindrances caused by the Department. In such a case, the Contractor is entitled only to extension of the period of contract. Indeed, such an extension was asked for, and granted on more than one occasion. (The penalty levied for completing the work beyond the extended period of contract has been waived in this case). The contract was not avoided by the Contractor, but he chose to complete the work within the extended time. In such a case, the claim for compensation is clearly barred by Clause 59 of the APDSS which is, admittedly, a term of the agreement between the parties."
77. In Para 24 of the Division Bench judgment referred to the facts of the case and observed that the compensation claimed on the basis of the consumer's price index and establishment and overhead charges and a large portion of the claim pertains to the original period of contract itself. It further observed that it was not possible for them to apportion the amount awarded for the original period of contract and the amount awarded for the extended period, even assuming that the Arbitrator was competent to make such an award for the extended period of contract. Thus, Division Bench taking into facts of that particular case held that Clause 59 would apply and therefore, set aside the award of the Arbitrator.

78. The Division Bench of this Court had considered the effect of Clause 59 in Superintending Engineer, Irrigation Department, Nizamabad v. Progressive Engineering Company, Hyderabad, (DB), held that the claim for escalation of rates for the work done during the extended period of contract was maintainable, even though undertaking was given by the Contractor agreeing to do the work and the said undertaking is not a bar as the undertaking was found to have obtained by the Department by coercion. The Division Bench observed in Paras 12 and 13 as follows:

"Under Section 14 of the Contract Act, it is essential for the enforceability of an agreement that the consent should be free. The consent should not have been obtained by coercion, undue influence, fraud, misrepresentation or mistake. The term 'coercion' corresponds to the concept of 'duress' in English Law. 'Coercion' according to Section 15 of the Contract Act "means and involves the committing or threatening to commit an act forbidden by the Indian Penal Code or the wrongful withholding of property belonging to another person, to the prejudice of that person or any person whatever, with the intention of inducing that person to enter into a contract.
In passing, we may mention that in the recent times, the concept of economic duress has come to be recognised in England. Chitti on Contracts (25th edition) summarises the said concept in the following words at page 486:
"In substance this amounts to recognising that certain threats or forms of pressure, not associated with threats to the person, nor limited to the seizure or withholding of goods, may give grounds for relief to a party who enters into a contract as a result of the threats or the pressure."
Thus, refusal of extension of time despite there being valid reasons unless the Contractor offered to execute the work for old rates might amount to economic duress especially because the employer is in a position of dominance armed, as it were, with a printed form of contract with terms of his choice."

79. Referring to Progressive Engineer Company's case (supra), the Department tried to take the advantage on the case dealt with by the Supreme Court in Ramalinga Reddy v. Superintending Engineer, 1994 (5) SCALE 67. This was also considered by the Division Bench. The Division Bench taking into consideration the judgments of the Supreme Court in Ramalinga Reddy's case (supra) and also the judgment of this Court in Shivaraji Reddy's case (supra) observed in Paras 23, 24, 25, 26, 31, 32, 33, 37 as follows:

"23. If we are called upon to decide on the validity of award from the stand point of Clause 59, we may have to answer several debatable and moot questions, as rightly pointed out by the learned Counsel for the petitioner. Such questions are: what is the true scope and effect of Clause 59? Does it altogether shut out the payment of extra rate for the work done beyond the agreement period irrespective of the circumstances in which the work had to be prolonged and irrespective of the breach of fundamental contractual obligations by the other party ? Whether the decision of the Supreme Court in Ramalinga Reddy's case 1994 (5) SCALE 67, is a complete answer to the respondent's claim for extra rate and that decision applies with equal force to the facts of the instant case? But, for reasons stated hereinafter, we need not record our definite views on these questions.
24. To digress a little, we must voice an irrepressible feeling at the back of our mind that it would result in grave injustice if the Contractor is called upon to execute the work at the old rate in spite of prolongation of the contract not merely for reasons beyond his control but on account of non-performance of a fundamental obligation that was expected to be performed by the employer. It cannot be denied that unless the water level is maintained by the Department at a congenial level, it becomes impracticable if not impossible to carry out the work. When during a major part of the contractual period, the requisite water level was not maintained by the Department, the Contractor cannot be expected to complete the work within the agreement period. To require him to do the work at the same old rates for years together would lead to palpable injustice, especially when we bear in mind that the State could have gained nothing by putting an end to the contract and entering into a fresh contract for the execution of the balance work. But, these considerations of justice and reasonableness may not be strictly relevant as it is often said that an Arbitrator is not a conciliator and he cannot go by his own notions of justice and equity regardless of the terms of the contract and the law of the land.
25. Before we proceed further, we take note of the argument of the learned Government Pleader that the respondent could have as well refused to perform and determined the contract after the expiry of the agreement period of the rates were not workable. Having agreed to proceed with the work without any assurance as to extra payment, it is argued that the Contractor cannot lay such claim subsequently. This argument, in our view, is nothing but simplification of the issue. The respondent having been allowed to do the work beyond the agreement period and the State having taken benefit of the work done is liable to pay the Contractor at the prevailing rates and thereby compensate him reasonably unless, of course, there is a contractual bar against such reimbursement. This is based on the principle of quantum meruit. The Contractor's claim cannot be repudiated on the mere ground that he has agreed to proceed with the work even beyond the agreement period without getting an assurance from the Government that extra rate will be paid for. We have to eschew from consideration the fact that the respondent undertook not to claim extra rate during the period of extension of contract work inasmuch as we have already held that such undertaking is not valid and binding on the respondent.
26. Coming back to Clause 59, we are relieved of the necessity to dilate upon its ambit and amplitude, effect and implifications for one important reason which we have already adverted to. At the risk of repetition, we wish to point out that no plea was advanced in the counter/rebuttal statement filed by the Superintending Engineer. It was not even indicated in general terms that a claim for extra rates for the work done beyond the agreement period is prohibited under the contract or that the Contractor is bound under the contract to carry out the work at the same rates whatever be the extra cost involved. Obviously, no reliance was placed on the clause before the Arbitrators. We do not also find any reference in the award to Clause 59. The Arbitrators did not, therefore, have occasion to interpret Clause 59 and to consider the effect thereof. Clause 59 was relied upon for the first time in the objections filed before the Civil Court. When Clause 59 or an analogous term in the contract was never put in issue before the Arbitrators, it cannot be said that the award is vitiated by an error of law apparent on the face of it or that the Arbitrators committed a legal misconduct in not considering the same.
31. In Ch.Ramalinga Reddy's case, the same line of approach was adopted and it was held that the claim for payment of extra rate for the work done beyond the agreement period could not be entertained by the Arbitrator by reason of Clause 59 of A.P.D.S.S. After referring to the case of Sudershan Trading Company, , it was observed that:
"It was there observed that there are two different and distinct grounds involved in many cases concerning the setting aside of Arbitration Awards. One is that there is error apparent on the face of the award and the other is that the Arbitrator exceeded his jurisdiction. In the later case the Court can look into the arbitration agreement but in the former, it cannot. An award may be set aside on the ground that the Arbitrator had exceeded his jurisdiction in making it. In the case before us, the Arbitrator was required to decide the claims referred to him having regard to the contract between the parties. His jurisdiction, therefore, is limited by the terms of the contract. Where the contract plainly barred the Appellant from making any claim, it was impermissible to make an award in respect thereof and the Court was entitled to intervene."
32. It was further observed that the Court should intervene when the Arbitrator has made an award in respect of a claim which is by the terms of the contract plainly barred.

33. It seems to us an enigma to reconcile the principle that an Arbitrator giving an award contrary to the terms of the contract commits an error of jurisdiction and the equally well settled principle that the construction or interpretation of the terms of the contract is an error within the jurisdiction of the Arbitrator. We can only say that the deviding line is thin and on which side of the line the conclusion of the Arbitrator falls is a matter not free from doubt. The only way to harmonise these two principles seems to be to see whether the particular term of the contract providing for or prohibiting the payment of extra amount for the work done in given circumstances is to patently clear that it means only one thing and one and only view is possible. If the relevant clause in the contract is ambiguous or does not necessarily speak out in one voice and more than one view is reasonably possible it could be said that the Arbitrator was within his jurisdiction to interpret the clause and reach his own conclusion. His conclusion in such an event cannot be faulted as it is not a conclusion reached by wandering outside his jurisdiction. His award will still be within his jurisdiction even if the interpretation placed by the Arbitrator either expressly or by necessary implication does not appeal to the Court. That is why in Associated Engineering Company's case, , the phrase "manifest disregard of contract" is used. The observations at Paragraph 23 succinctly indicates the line of approach of the Supreme Court in Associated Engineering Company's case. At the risk of repetition, we quote that sentence "This conclusion is reached not by construction of the contract but by merely looking at the contract." As already noticed in that case, the Arbitrator applied a formula different from what was laid down in the contract for making reimbursement of extra wages thereby ignoring the contract virtually. If we understand the judgment in Associated Engineering Company's case in that light, there would be no difficulty in reconciling the two principles adverted to above. But, the observations in Trustees of Port Trust of Madras v. Engineering Constructions Corporation Limited, 1995 (4) SCALE 742, pose a further difficulty in harmonising the two principles. After referring to the principle laid down in Hindustan Construction Company Limited v. State of Jammu and Kashmir, , that the Court cannot interfere even if the interpretation placed by the Arbitrator on the relevant clauses of the contract is erroneous, their Lordship's observed as follows:

"The above principle, of course, is subject to the proposition aforestated, viz., that the Arbitrator being a creature of the contract must operate within the four corners of the contract and cannot travel beyond it either by mis-interpreting the terms of the contract or otherwise,
37. Coming to Ramalinga Reddy's case varying interpretations were not put forward before their Lordships. Both parties have taken it for granted that Clause 59 is an absolute bar against the payment of compensation in the form of extra rates for the work done beyond the agreement period. The circumstances under which the contract prolonged beyond the stipulated period are not spelt out in the judgment. It is reasonable to think that by reason of a particular fact situation in that case, the Contractor could not wriggle out of the parameters of Clause 59. The various possible interpretations which we indicated above, were not the subject-matter of consideration by the Supreme Court. Be that as it may even if we go by the broad observations that the claim for award of extra rates for the work done beyond the agreement period is 'plainly barred' under Clause 59 and the Arbitrator therefore, acted in excess of jurisdiction in entertaining the claim, we do not think that Clause 59 becomes a stumbling-block to the Contractor, the reason being that it was never pressed into service by the appellants before the Arbitrator. It was only after the award was pronounced the plea based on Clause 59 was raised before the Civil Court."
Finally, the conclusion with regard to Clause 59 were summarised by the Division Bench as follows:

"Our conclusions in regard to Clause 59 of the contract are summarised as follows:
(1) Clause 59 was never pleaded before the Arbitrators to resist the Contractor's claim.
(2) Assuming that Clause 59 creates a jurisdictional bar to the entertainment of a claim for escalation in rates, it cannot be said that the award is the product of inherent or patent lack of jurisdiction insofar as it allows a claim contrary to and disregarding one of the terms of the contract. At best, it would be a case of latent lack of jurisdiction, as pointed out in Tarapore and Company v. State of M.P., . It would therefore, be relevant to consider the conduct on the part of Appellant in failing to put forward the objection based on a contractual term or the acquiescence of the Appellant to suffer a decision on merits and the resultant prejudice that might be caused to the opposite party if it is allowed to be raised in post-award, proceedings.
(3) Viewed from the above angle, it is not just and proper to allow the Appellant to raise that plea for the first time before the Civil Court, especially because the Contractor was denied the opportunity to prove that the claim falls within the exceptions contemplated by Clause 59 having regard to the factual situation obtaining in the present case. The Contractor could have also contended that on a just and reasonable construction of Clause 59, there is no room to apply the bar laid down in that clause to the facts of the instant case.
(4) In Ramalinga Reddy's case there was no finding that the execution of contract was prolonged on account of breach of a fundamental obligation on the part of employer. No argument was advanced on the various possible interpretations to be placed on Clause 59. On the other hand, it seems to be a common ground that the fact situation giving rise to the claim did not attract the defined exceptions.
(5) The decision in Ramalinga Reddy's case does not preclude an enquiry into the question of applicability of the bar contained in Clause 59 - if that is put in issue, on the basis of factual situation obtaining in a given case.
(6) The question whether Clause 59 bars the claim for escalation in rates where the execution of contract is prolonged beyond the originally agreed period on account of a fundamental breach on the part of the employer (Department) is at least a debatable point."
80. Yet, in another Division Bench in Gangareddy's case (supra) consisting of Justice P. Venkatarami Reddy (as he then was) and myself (GBJ), again considered the scope of Clause 59. The learned Government Pleader heavily stressed his contention with reference to Clause 59 basing on the judgment of this Court in M/s. Associated Engineering Enterprises's case (supra) and Ramalinga Reddy's case (supra) has observed as follows:

"Clause 59 was considered and applied by this Court in more than one case. In State of A.P. v. Associated Engineering Enterprises, Hyderabad, it was observed at Paragraph 26:
"Applying the principle of the above decision to the facts of the case before us, it must be held that Clause 59 bars a claim for compensation on account of any delays or hindrances caused by the Department. In such a case, the Contractor is entitled only to extension of the period of contract. Indeed, such an extension was asked for, and granted on more than one occasion. (The penalty levied for completing the work beyond the extended period of contract has been waived in this case). The contract was not avoided by the Contractor, but the chose to complete the work within the extended time. In such a case, the claim for compensation is clearly barred by Clause 59 of the A.P.D.S.S. which is admittedly, a term of the agreement between the parties."
It may be noticed that in the above case, Claim No. 1 which was turned down on the basis of Clause 59 was for compensation pertaining to the original period of contract as noted at Paragraph 31 of the judgment. Referring to the earlier Division Bench judgment rendered by Jeevan Reddy, J., (as he then was) and Bhaskar Rao J, the learned Judges posed the question and answered as follows:

"The question is whether any claim for compensation is permissible for the original period of contract ? It was held by a Bench of this Court of which one of us (Jeevan Reddy, J) was a member in - A.A.O. No. 786 of 1986 dated 1.12.1988, that such a claim is not permissible by virtue of Clause 59 of the A.P.D.S.S."
In Prasad and Company, Hyderabad v. Superintending Engineer, Irrigation Circle, Chittoor, 1995 (3) ALT 537, the Division Bench of which one of us (Venkatarama Reddi, J.) was a member, held that escalation over and above the agreed rates during the currency of the agreement period was clearly barred by P.S.59 of A.P.D.S.S, In Ch. Ramalinga Reddy v. Superintending Engineer, (1994) 5 Scale 67, the Supreme Court had gone a step further and held that the claim for the payment of extra rate even for the work done beyond the agreement period was unsustainable in the light of the specific prohibition contained in Clause 59. However, it is not discernible from the judgment whether the prolongation of the contract was for reasons attributable to the Contractor or on account of breach of contractual obligations by the employer as in the instant case. Be that as it may, even assuming that Clause 59 would have in the normal course come in the way of the petitioner claiming escalation in rates for the work done beyond the contractual period, the special facts and circumstances of this case stand apart and do not attract the bar of Clause 59. We agree with the learned Counsel for the Contractor that the immunity conferred by the exclusionary Clause 59 must be deemed to have been waived and the Department is estopped from taking shelter under it."

81. In Ramachandra Reddy and Company v. State of A.P., , on an appeal against the judgment and decree of the Civil Court, confirming Item No. 1 by the Arbitrator, this Court set aside the same and remanded the same to the lower Court for fresh consideration. While affirming the said decision, the Supreme Court observed thus:

"The Arbitrator being a creature of the agreement either specifically or inferentially provides for a higher rate to be awarded for any additional or excess work done by the Contractor, it would not be permissible for the Arbitrator to award for the so-called additional work at a higher rate. While considering the scope of Clause 69, the Supreme Court observed that excavation of hard rock cannot be held to be a supplemental item and on the other hand, it is an item of work tendered and accepted, and, as such Clause 63 will have no application to claim Item 1".
82. The Supreme Court further observed that the question of granting a higher rate for any extra quantity of work executed by the Contractor would arise only when the contract provides for such escalated rate either expressly or by implication as in the case of S. Harcharan Singh v. Union of India, , where the competent authority had agreed for the same by correspondence. But, in the above case, when there is no such acceptance by the competent authority, and there is no provision in the contract, permitting such escalated rate for the additional quantity of excavation made, the conclusion is irresistible that the Contractor was not entitled to a higher rate.

83. It was further found that the grant of extension of time will not in any way make the Contractor eligible for any extra claim due to escalation in rates of labour and material.

84. It has to be seen that Clause 59 was not the subject-matter which fell for consideration before the Supreme Court. Moreover, from the facts of the case, it is not clear as the work was carried beyond the contract period. Therefore, the judgment on facts is not applicable to the facts of this case.

85. Even otherwise also in Ramalinga Reddy's case (supra), where the judgment of the Division Bench of this Court in Associated Company's case (supra) was affirmed the observation of the Division Bench was that the Contractor did not indicate his intention to claim higher wages. In the absence of such indication, it was held that the Contractor was not entitled. In the instant case as observed by the Arbitrator, there is a clear indication that reserving his right to claim the loss or compensation.

86. It is also to be noticed that not only the designs were changed, but also the additional work was entrusted. Granting extension for an unreasonable long period and contending that the Contractor is only entitled for the S.S.R. rates of 1979, when the contract was prolonged till 1985 and when the deviation limits of time was beyond 25%, in the absence of any supplementary agreements, normally the Contractor would be entitled for the market value, but the Contractor restricted to the S.S.R. rates. Therefore, in such a situation, award of the Arbitrator cannot be said that he exceeded the limits or wandered beyond the contractual terms and conditions.

87. In Government of A.P. v. G. Kondal Rao, (DB), the Division Bench observed thus:

"In the instant case there was a breach of contractual obligation on the part of the Department in their failure to shift the electrical poles within a reasonable time. The Contractor was within his rights to demand a reasonable extra payment for the work that had to be done far beyond the stipulated period. But, according to the letter referred to in the award, the Contractor while seeking extension of the period of contract, undertook not to claim any compensation. This fact is recited in the award itself. Admittedly, it was on the basis of such letter that extensions of time were granted. In such circumstances, it was held that the Contractor was estopped from claiming extra amounts."
But, in the instant case, the facts are quite" different as already noticed, the Contractor has categorically stated reserving his right to claim losses.

88. In Associated Engineering Company v. Government of Andhra Pradesh, , which is an appeal arising out of the judgment of the Division Bench, the Supreme Court in Paras 26, 27, 28 and 29 observed as follows:

"26. The Arbitrator cannot act arbitrarily, irrationally, capriciously or independently of the contract. His sole function is to arbitrate in terms of the contract. He has no power apart from what the parties have given him under the contract. If he has travelled outside the bounds of the contract, he has acted without jurisdiction. But if he has remained inside the parameters of the contract and has construed the provisions of the contract, his award cannot be interfered with unless he has given reasons for the award disclosing an error apparent on the face of it.
(27) An arbitrator who acts in manifest disregard of the contract acts without jurisdiction. His authority is derived from the contract and is governed by the Arbitration Act which embodies principles derived from a specialised branch of the law of agency. He commits misconduct if by his award he decides matters excluded by the agreement. A deliberate departure from contract amounts to not only manifest disregard of his authority or a misconduct on his part, but it may tantamount to a mala fide action. A conscious disregard of the law or the provisions of the contract from which he has derived his authority vitiates the award.
(28) A dispute as to the jurisdiction of the Arbitrator is not a dispute within the award, but one which has to be decided outside the award. An umpire or Arbitrator cannot widen his jurisdiction by deciding a question not referred to him by the parties or by deciding a question otherwise than in accordance with the contract. He cannot say that he does not care what the contract says. He is bound by it. It must bear his decision. He cannot travel outside its bounds. If he exceeded his jurisdiction by so doing, his award would be liable to be set aside. As stated by Lord Parmoor.
"..........It would be impossible to allow an umpire to arrogate to himself jurisdiction over a question, which, on the true construction of the submission, was not referred to him. An umpire cannot widen the area of his jurisdiction by holding, contrary to the fact, that the matter which he affects to decide is within the submission of the parties."
Attorney General for Manitoba v. Kelly, (1922) 1 AC 268, 276.

Evidence of matters not appearing on the face of the award would be admissible to decide whether the Arbitrator travelled outside the bounds of the contract and thus exceeded his jurisdiction. In order to see what the jurisdiction of the Arbitrator is, it is open to the Court to see what dispute was submitted to him. If that is not clear from the Award, it is open to the Court to have recourse to outside sources. The Court can look at the affidavits and pleadings of parties; the Court can look at the agreement itself. Bunge & Co. v. Dewarand Webb., (1921) 8 Lloyd's Rep. 436(KB).

29. If the Arbitrator commits an error in the construction of the contract, that is an error within his jurisdiction. But if he wanders outside the contract and deals with matters not allotted to him, he commits a jurisdictional error. Such error going to his jurisdiction can be established by looking into material outside the award. Extrinsic evidence is admissible in such cases because the dispute is not something, which arises under or in relation to the contract or dependent on the construction of the contract or to be determined within the award. The dispute as to jurisdiction is a matter which is outside the award or outside whatever may be said about it in the award. The ambiguity of the award can, in such cases, be resolved by admitting extrinsic evidence. The rationale of this rule is that the nature of the dispute is something, which has to be determined outside and independent of what appears in the award. Such jurisdictional error needs to be proved by evidence extrinsic to the award."

But, in the instant case, taking into consideration the jurisdiction of the Arbitrator under Clause 73, the Arbitrator has interpreted the Clause 59 and held that Clause 59 has no application and such a finding cannot be beyond the jurisdiction of the Arbitrator and it cannot be said that the Arbitrator has wandered for outside the discriminated area.

89. In P.V. Subba Naidu v. Government of A.P., , the High Court has set aside the non-speaking award of the Arbitrator on the ground that the subject-matter of the claims before the Arbitrators was beyond the terms and conditions of the Arbitrators. Against those findings, appeals and cross appeals were filed by the State as well as the Contractor. Referring to Clause 73, the Supreme Court observed in Para 4 as follows:

"The entire thrust of the judgment is on examining the terms of the contract and interpreting them. The terms of the arbitration clause, however, are very wide. The arbitration clause is not confined merely to any question of interpretation of the contract. It also covers any matter or thing arising thereunder. Therefore, all disputes which arise as a result of the contract would be covered by the arbitration clause. The last two lines of the arbitration clause also make it clear that the Arbitrator has power to open up, review and revise any certificate, opinion, decision, requisition or notice except in regard to those matters which are expressly excepted under the contract, and that the Arbitrator has jurisdiction to determine all matters in dispute which shall be submitted to the Arbitrator and of which notice shall have been given."
and thus set aside the judgment of the Division Bench. The Supreme Court further observed that Clause 73 of the contract which provides for arbitration is widely worded and that the High Court is not right in examining and interpreting the contract to see whether the claim was sustainable under the terms of the contract. The very same clause is forming part of the contract in the instant case.

90. The Supreme Court held that the award as passed by the Arbitrator was quite legal and valid and it was within his jurisdiction. The Supreme Court also referred to the cases of K.R. Raveendranathan v. State of Kerala, and Sudarsan Trading Company v. Government of Kerala, held thus:

"In the case of K.R. Raveendranathan v. State of Kerala this Court, relying upon the decision in Hindustan Construction Co. Ltd. v. State of J&K has held that the Court by purporting to construe the contract cannot take upon itself the burden of saying that it was contrary to the contract and as such beyond jurisdiction. This is precisely what has been done in the present case. In the case of Sudarsan Trading Co. v. Government of Kerala this Court has made a distinction between error apparent on the face of the award lack of jurisdiction. It has held that only in a speaking award can the Court look into the reasoning of the Arbitrator. It is not open to the Court to probe the mental processes of the Arbitrator, or speculate on what impelled an Arbitrator to arrive at his conclusion. An award can be set aside on the ground that the Arbitrator, in making it, had exceeded his jurisdiction. But by purporting to construe the contract, the Court could not take upon itself the burden of saying that this was contrary to the contract and as such beyond jurisdiction. The same view has been reiterated in Hindustan Construction Company Limited v. State of J&K."
91. In this regard, reference also can be made to the case reported in National Fertilisers Limited v. Puran Chand Nangia, AIR 2001 SC 53, wherein it has been held that the integrity of the contract cannot be interfered with in the guise of interpreting the clauses in the contract.

92. Thus, after prolonged peregrination of the issues in Clause 59, to APDSS, we record the following conclusions, in addition to the views expressed by the Division Bench of this Court in Ramalinga Reddy's case (supra)

(a) Clause 59 of the APDSS is not all pervasive weapon of the Department. It cannot be used a protective shield for the breaches committed by the Department.

(b) Even construing the validity of Clause 59, the Department cannot plead total immunity.

(c) The Contractor can claim appropriate compensation if he establishes the Clause 59 was not attracted.

(d) Plea of waiver/acquiescence is available to the both parties and it has to be pleaded and proved by sufficient reliable evidence.

(e) In case of delays/defaults/breaches solely attributable to the Department, Clause 59 protection is not available to the Department.

(f) In cases of unreasonable extensions or extension beyond 25% of the actual working period, Clause 59 cannot be involved by the Department.

(g) Mere acceptance of extension of time would not ipso facto be considered as waiver on the part of the Contractor. The preceding and attendant circumstances coupled with the conduct of the parties will have to be taken into consideration.

(h) In view of the wide wording in Clause 73 of APDSS the Arbitrator is empowered to interpret and decide the applicability of Clause 59.

(i) If the integrity of the contract is interfered by the parties, the party, who interfered cannot swim into any of the protective clauses in the contract including Clause 59.

(j) The power of rescinding the contract in cases of defaults is available to the parties. However, non-cancellation or otherwise of the contract and the circumstances under which the power was not exercises is a relevant factor to be kept while deliberating the applicable of Clause 59.

(k) Clause 59 cannot be pressed into service as straightjacket formula. Facts and circumstances of each case have to be taken into consideration for arriving at a conclusion whether Clause 59 is applicable or not ?

Applying the conclusions recorded supra, let us consider the case on hand.

93. Clause 59 prima facie prohibits the claim for compensation by the Contractor on account of the delays and defaults or whatever reasons and that only reasonable extension of time is permissible. The learned Arbitrator considering this issue interpreted the same to mean the escalation of prices is not covered by Clause 59 and what is contemplated under Section 59 is only compensation for the delays committed and it never prohibited the Contractor from claiming the escalation charges. When once the term of the contract has been interpreted, which is always permissible for the Arbitrator under Clause 73, which is widely worded, the interpretation placed by the Arbitrator has to be accepted. Therefore, when once the Arbitrator is clothed with the jurisdiction by virtue of Clause 73, temporary injunction is always open for him to interpret and construe the terms of the contract. The Department having failed to handover the site properly in accordance with the terms and conditions of the contract and having disabled the Contractor from executing the work as per the schedule on account of the various obstacles created including the non-initiation of the Land Acquisition proceedings, can it be said that still Clause 59 can be successfully invoked by the Department. It is well settled law that a person, who breaches the contract or who violates the contract is liable for damages or consequences and this clause cannot be interpreted to mean that whatever the defaults or breaches committed by the Department, the Department becomes immune from consequences. Such stipulation in the contract is highly arbitrary and unreasonable and the Division Bench of this Court has already held such a stipulation, even though it was agreed by the parties, but at the same time, when it is patently one sided and suppressed the Contractor, it cannot be said to be valid contract. Such a contract can be said to be opposed to the public policy. Obviously, it goes to establish that the Department cannot interfere with the integrity of the contract. While at the same time the Contractor cannot be allowed to interfere with the integrity of the contract, the primary intendment of the Clause 59 is not to allow the Contractor to go for compensation. On the other hand, the Department is entitled to grant reasonable extension which implies that reasonable extension of time without disturbing the work schedule is permissible, but when unreasonable extension is granted, it cannot be said that the Clause 59 also covers the situation. In case of a contract, which is liable to be executed within 12 months, a reasonable extension of one or two months can be granted by the authorities in which event, the Contractor will not be liable to claim compensation. But, if the extension is granted for a wholly unreasonable period and left asking the Contractor not to claim compensation is not contemplated under Section 59. The reasonable extension of time is sine qua non for invoking Clause 59, if the extension is unreasonable, Clause 59 will come into play. Admittedly, in the instant case, it was completed in 1985 and the work which was scheduled to be completed within 15 months has taken 5 years and which was accepted and the learned Arbitrator found that the delays were completely attributable to the Department. Therefore, even though extension was granted, since the extension is not a reasonable extension and in the guise of extending the time, the Contractor cannot be allowed to suffer the loss of escalation of the prices and connected liabilities.

94. The learned Government Pleader relied on the recent judgment of the Supreme Court reported in General Manager, Northern Railway v. Sarvesh Chopra, . The matter arose at the reference stage. The contract was entered between the Railways and the Contractor for the work of construction of bored piles 500 mm dia for widening and for raising of Pul Mitha. Disputes arose between the parties and the Contractor moved petition under Section 20 of the Arbitration Act praying for arbitration agreement being filed in the Court and referring six claims to the Arbitrator for settlement. The learned Single Judge of Delhi High Court original side directed two claims to be referred on the ground that the claims No. 3 to 6 fell within the excepted matters on interpreting Clause 63 of General Conditions of Contract which did not permit the reference to the arbitration. However, on an intra appeal filed, the Division Bench, set aside the Order of the learned Single Judge and held that the claims No. 3 to 6 were not covered by the excepted matters. On an appeal by a special leave, the Supreme Court set aside the judgment of the Division Bench on the ground that the claims No. 3 to 6 fell within the excepted matters. The Supreme Court observed that in an application under Section 20 or Section 17, the arbitrability of a claim may be determined at three stages namely (i) while making reference to arbitration, (Item Nos. 1 and 2) in the course of arbitral proceedings, and (iii) while making the award Rule of Court.

95. The Supreme Court also referred the cases in Ramalinga Reddy's case (supra) and also Associated Engineering's case (supra) which arose out of the judgment of the Division Benches of this Court. The Supreme Court in Paras 12 and 13 observed as follows:

"In Ch.Ramalinga Reddy v. Superintending Engineer and another, 1994 (5) Scale 67, claim was allowed by Arbitrator for "payment of extra rates for work done beyond agreement time at schedule of rate prevailing at the time of execution". Clause 59 of A.P. Standard Specifications, which applied to the contract between the parties, stated that no claim for compensation on account of delays or hindrances to the work from any cause would lie except as therein defined. The claim was found to be outside the defined exceptions. When extensions of time were granted to the appellant to complete the work the respondents made it clear that no claim for compensation would lie. For both these reasons, this Court held that it was impermissible to award such claim because the Arbitrator was required to decide the claims referred to him having regard to the contract between the parties and therefore, his jurisdiction was limited by the terms of the contract.
A Division Bench decision of High Court of Andhra Pradesh in State of A.P. v. Associated Engineering Enterprises, Hyderabad, , is of relevance. Jeevan Reddy, J. (as His Lordship then was), speaking for the Division Bench, held that where Clause 59 of the standard terms and condition of the contract provided that neither party to the contract shall claim compensation "on account of delays or hindrances of work from any cause whatever", an award given by an Arbitrator ignoring such express terms of the contract was bad, We find ourselves in agreement with the view so taken."
96. Dealing with the "no damage" clause as interpreted under American Jurisprudence and Sections 55 and 56 of Indian Contract Act, the Supreme Court observed as follows:

"In Hudson's Building and Engineering Contracts there is reference to 'no damage' clauses, an American expression, used for describing a type of clause which classically grants extensions of time for completion, for variously defined 'delays' including some for which, as breaches of contract on his part, the owner would prima facie be contractually responsible, but then proceeds to provide that the extension of time so granted is to be the only right or remedy of the Contractor and, whether expressly or by implication, that damages or compensation are not to be recoverable therefor. These "no damage" clause appear to have been primarily designed to protect the owner from late start or co-ordination claims due to other Contractor delays which would otherwise arise. Such clauses originated in Federal Government contracts but are now adopted by private owners and expanded to cover wider categories or breaches of contract by the owners in situations which it would be difficult to regard as other than oppressive and unreasonable. American Jurisprudence developed so as to avoid the effect of such clauses and permitted the contractor to claim in four situations, namely, (i) where the delay is of a different kind from that contemplated by the clause, including extreme delay, (ii) where the delay amounts to abandonment, (iii) where the delay is a result of positive acts of interference by the owner, and (iv) bad faith. The first of the said four exceptions has received considerable support from judicial pronouncements in England and Commonwealth. Not dissimilar principles have enabled some commonwealth Courts to avoid the effect of 'no damage' clauses. [See Hudson, ibid].
In our country question of delay in performance of contract is governed by Sections 55 and 56 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872. If there is an abnormal rise in prices of material and labour, it may frustrate the contract and then the innocent party need not perform the contract. So also, if time is of the essence of the contract, failure of the employer to perform a mutual obligation would enable the Contractor to avoid the contract as the contract becomes voidable at his option. Where time is "of the essence" of an obligation, Chitty on Contracts (Twenty-Eighth Edition, 1999 at p.1106, Para 22-015) states "a failure to perform by the stipulated time will entitle the innocent party to (a) terminate performance of the contract and thereby put an end to all the primary obligations of both parties remaining unperformed; and (b) claim damages from the contract-breaker on the basis that he has committed a fundamental breach of the contract ("a breach going to the root of the contract") depriving the innocent party of the benefit of the contract ("damages for loss of the whole transaction")." If, instead of avoiding the contract, the Contractor accepts the belated performance of reciprocal obligation on the part of the employer, the innocent party, i.e., the contractor, cannot claim compensation for any loss occasioned by the non-performance of the reciprocal promise by the employer at the time agreed, "unless, at the time of such acceptance, he gives notice to the promisor of his intention to do so". Thus, it appears that under the Indian law, in spite of there being a contract between the parties, whereunder the contractor has undertaken not to make any claim for delay in performance of the contract occasioned by an act of the employer, still a claim would be entertainable in one of the following situations: (i) if the Contractor repudiates the contract exercising his right to do so under Section 55 of the Contract Act, (ii) the employer gives an extension of time either by entering into supplemental agreement or by making it clear that escalation of rates or compensation for delay would be permissible, (iii) if the contractor makes it clear that escalation of rates or compensation for delay shall have to be made by the employer and the employer accepts performance by the Contractor in spite of delay and such notice by the Contractor putting the employer on terms."
97. The Supreme Court finally held that it may be open to prefer a claim touching apparently excepted the matter subject to a clear case having been made out for excepting or excluding the claim from within the four corners of the excepted matters. It has to be noted that the Supreme Court was dealing with the interpretation of Clause 63 of the General Conditions which reads thus;

"CLAUSE 63 of the General Conditions of the Contract provides as under:
"MATTERS finally determined by the Railway -All disputes and differences of any kind whatsoever arising out of or in connection with the contract, whether during the progress of the work or after its completion and whether before or after the determination of the contract, shall be referred by the Contractor to the Railway and the Railway shall within a reasonable time after receipt of the Contractor's representation make and notify decisions on all matters referred to by the Contractor in writing provided that matters for which provision has been/made in Clauses 18, 22(5), 39, 45(a), 55, 55-A(5), 61(2) and 62(1) (XII)(B)(e)(b) of the General conditions of Contract or in any clauses of the special conditions of the contract shall be deemed as excepted matters and decisions thereon shall be final and binding on the Contractor provided further that excepted matters shall stand specifically excluded from the purview of the arbitration clause and not be referred to arbitration."
The said clause clearly put the matters covered in Clause 18 etc., and also special conditions of the contract beyond the purview of arbitration. The special conditions inter alia are as follows:

"CLAUSES 9.2, 11.3 and 21.5 of Special Conditions of contract are as under:
"9.2. No material price variation or wages escalation on any account whatsoever and compensation for "Force Majaure" etc., shall be payable under this contract. 11.3. No claim whatsoever will be entertained by the Railway on account of any delay or hold up of the works arising out of delay in supply of drawings, changes, modifications, alterations, additions, omissions, omissions in the site layout plans or detailed drawings or designs and or late supply of such materials as are required to be arranged by the Railway or due to any other factor on Railway Accounts. 21.5. No claim for idle labour and/or idle machinery etc., on any account will be entertained. Similarly no claim shall be entertained for business loss or any such loss."
But, such a clause is not to be found in the APDSS particularly Clause 73 as already held, the Supreme Court has observed that Clause 73 is wide enough to cover all the disputes. It is also to be observed that none of the clauses in the agreement were referred as excepted clauses under Clause 73. The Supreme Court had categorically held that when the clauses are specifically excepted under Clause 63, they do not fall within the arbitrable zone and fall outside the scope. As observed in Ramalinga Reddy's case (supra), there was a specific condition imposed by the State while granting extension that the Contractor was not entitled for any escalation or compensation. But, in the instant case there is no such condition, but on the other hand, the Contractor had made it clear while accepting the extension of time, which was granted by the Department stating that he reserved the right to claim the compensation or loss. Even in Associated Engineer's case (supra), the Division Bench, apart from the other factual matters, observed that, inasmuch as, the Contractor had accepted the extension without making any protest or serving any notice that he would be entitled to claim the compensation. But, that situation is not present in the case on hand. The Contractor has specifically indicated his intention while accepting the extension. Further, another distinguishing feature that can be noticed in the case on hand is that the delay which is caused by the Department is a positive act of interference which totally disabled the Contractor from undertaking the work and completing the same within the time. What was claimed is neither the loss of profit nor the market rates, but since the extension was made at the instance of the Department on the ground that there were delays and defaults attributable to the Department and the value of the work done was claimed on the basis of the S.S.R. rates which were prevailing when the work was done beyond the period of agreement. Therefore, it cannot be said to be escalation of rate. But, it is only the S.S.R. rates which is notified by the Government during the particular year and what was claimed by the Contractor is the said rate and not the escalated rate namely the market rate. Thus, the judgment relied on by the learned Government Pleader has no application to the facts of the case.

98. Thus, viewed from any angle, the contention of the learned Government Pleader seeking protection under Clause 59 is wholly unsustainable and we do not find any ground to interfere with the award passed by the learned Arbitrator in this regard. The claims were admittedly made for the compensation for the work done and idle labour which are consequences of unreasonable extension and admittedly the work was done beyond the agreement period and the rates which were quoted in 1978 cannot be said to be the same rates in 1984-85. Thus, the escalation of charges and other items basing on the S.S.R. rates of relevant period was quite justified and we do not find any grounds to interfere with. Thus, the C.R.P. and C.M.A. filed by the Department are dismissed.

99. Coming to the appeal filed by the Contractor, the Civil Court rejected the claim at Sl.No. 4, which was allowed by the Arbitrator. The Arbitrator allowed the claim on the ground that the Arbitrator after perusing the Books produced by the respondent, came to the conclusion that he is entitled for the amounts. But, the Civil Court holding that the said item was not covered by the terms and conditions of the agreement it held that the Contractor was not entitled for the amount awarded by the Arbitrator. We have to consider this contention. The learned Arbitrator discussed the issue in the following paragraphs:

"A perusal of the condition No. 10 of the agreement shows that the steel will be supplied in length, sizes and shape as received from the supplier by the respondents and any wastage arisen out of this shall be borne by the Contractor. Condition No. 12 says that the Contractor finished rates shall be based on the basic rates of supply of materials by the Department, labour for cutting steel rods and bending to the required shape including binding wire, lapping, welding, fabrication, etc. condition No. 10 speaks of the supply of steel whereas condition No. 12 speaks of the components for the calculation of rate. In condition No. 12 the material cost, the labour cost was included. On the other hand. Para 6 at page 90 of the agreement speaks of the calculation of rate for steel reinforcement for structures. The said Para 6 fully explains various operations involved in the steel reinforcements and structure and specifically states that the rate for reinforcement shall include cost of all steel consumed in this process. Further item 17 of the Schedule 'A' described the work as involving the cost of steel and the conveyance of steel, bending rods, tying grills and placing the grills in the position as directed by the Department and including the cost of binding wire, etc. complete for all R.C.C. items and for retaining walls and Diaphrams.
A perusal of the above conditions and descriptions of the work shows that the rate for this item shall include cost of all steel except wastage. Since the respondents have measured the work and recorded the same in M.Books, they ought to have paid the cost of steel involved in the overlapping also.
Section 70 of the Indian Contract Act says that where a person lawfully does anything for another or delivers anything to him not intending to do so gratuitously and such other person enjoys the benefit thereof, the latter is bound to make compensation to the former or to restore the things so done or delivered. Hence, the claimants are entitled to cost of steel involved in the overlapping.
But the claimant claimed at the rate of Rs. 5,000/- per M.T. as claimed under item No. 17 of schedule 'A' attached to the contract. But, the said rate admittedly includes the labour involved in the work. Here the claim is only to the steel involved in the work of overlapping which is not disputed by the respondents. As per the agreement at page 101, the issue rates of materials to be supplied by the Department, steel rate was quoted at Rs. 2,235/- per M.T. Hence, I award an amount of Rs. 89,400/- under this claim calculated at the rate of Rs. 2,235/- per M.T. for 40 M.T."
100. The Civil Court while discussing this issue in Para 23 of the judgment observed as follows:

"Therefore, it is evident that the condition No. 10 which is referred above already that the Department has agreed to supply steel in length, sizes and shapes as received from the suppliers. Clause 6 referred above makes it clear that it include all charges including bending, placing, binding, fixing in position as shown in the drawings. It also includes the cost of all Devices for keeping reinforcement in approved position. Clause 4 at page No. 89 gives the detail of placing of reinforcement. Therefore, any work done by the Contractor in furtherance of this Clause No. 4, it is only part of the agreed work and he is not entitled as in the case of any work done in addition. The learned Arbitrator in his award at page 62 stated "since the respondents have measured the work and recorded the same in M-Books, they ought to have been paid cost of the steel involved in the overlapping." The learned Arbitrator also referred Section 17 of the Indian Contract Act and justified this claim. It is evident from the above referred clause that the work done by the Contractor was only in pursuance of the agreement which forms part of his job and the rate includes on all the work as contemplated under clause No. 6. Therefore, mere recording in M-Book does not entitled the Contractor to this claim. The M-Book is not available before me. I do not see any reason except the reasons mentioned", the respondents have measured the work and recorded the same in the M-Book" as stated by the learned Arbitrator. The said reason for allowing this claim is not tenable since it is against specific clause of the agreement which is referred already. Therefore, this claim allowed by the learned Arbitrator is rejected, as the Plaintiff is not entitled to the same."
101. We have considered this issue in extenso and in this regard condition Nos. 10 and 12 are relevant, which are extracted below:

"Condition No. 10: Steel will be supplied in lengths, sizes, and shape as received from the suppliers. Any wastage arising out of this shall be borne by the Contractor.
Condition No. 12: The Contractor's finished rates shall be based on the basic rates of supply of the materials by the Department, labour for cutting steel rods and bending to the required shape including binding wire (wastage in cutting will have to be borne by the Contractor), lapping, welding, fabrication etc. complete"
102. The rate of calculation of steel also provided in Para 6 of the agreement which reads thus:

"6. RATE: Rate for reinforcement shall include cost of all steel, its binding, placing, binding and fixing in position as shown as the drawings and as directed by the Engineer-in-Charge. It shall also include cost of all devices for keeping reinforcement in approved position, cost of joining as per approved method and all wastage, overlaps and spacer bars."
103. Taking into consideration conditions No. 10 and 12 with reference to the material available on record in respect of this issue, we hold that the Arbitrator has travelled beyond the jurisdiction. We are of the view that the Arbitrator has exceeded his jurisdiction in awarding the amount. Thus, we do not find any illegality in the judgment of the lower Court rejecting the claim as awarded by the Arbitrator.

104. In the result, CMA No. 1079 of 1994 and CRP No. 2726 of 1994 are dismissed and CMA No. 953 of 1994 is dismissed.
================================================================================


================================================================================
CASE 12:
[Cites 52, Cited by 3]
Madras High Court
M/S.Ppn Power Generating Company ... vs Ppn (Mauritius) Company on 8 October, 2004
       

  

  

 
 
 IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS

Dated: 08/10/2004

Coram

The Hon'ble Mr.JUSTICE K.GOVINDARAJAN
and
The Hon'ble Mr.JUSTICE N.KANNADASAN

C.M.A.N.P.D.(B)No.2101  of 2004

M/s.PPN Power Generating Company Limited
rep., by its Managing Director Mr.S.Narayanan
having its Registered Office at
3rd Floor, Jhaver Plaza
1A, Nungambakkam High Road, Chennai.
                                                        .. Appellant

-vs-

1.PPN (Mauritius) Company
   A Corporation organised and existing
   under the laws of Mauritius
   and having its Registered Office at
   Les Jamalcas Building
   Vieux Conseil Street
   Port Louis, Mauritius

2.PSEG PPN Energy Company Limited
  A Corporation organised and existing
  under the laws of Mauritius
  and having its Registered Office at
  Valmet (Mauritius) Ltd.,
  608, St. James Court, St. Dennis Street
  Port Louis, Mauritius.

3.Apollo Infrastructure Projects
   Finance Company Ltd.
   Having its Registered Office at
   Ali Towers, 22, Greams  Road
   Chennai.600 006

4.Marubeni Corporation
   a Corporation organised under the laws of
   Japan and having its Principal Office at
   4-2,Ohtemachi, 1-Chome
   Chiyoda-Ku, Tokyo, Japan

5.Mr.S.Narayanan
  Managing Director
  PPN Power Generating Company Ltd.
  3rd Floor, Jhaver Plaza
  1A, Nungambakkam High Road
  Chennai.600 034

6.Dr.Pratap C.Reddy
   Director & Chairman (& Nominee of Apollo
   Infrastructure Projects Finance Company Ltd.)
   Apollo Hospitals Enterprise Limited
   Ali Towers, 22, Greams Road
   Chennai.600 006

7.Ms.Preetha Reddy
   Director ( & Nominee of Apollo
   Infrastructure Projects Finance Company Ltd.)
   Apollo Hospitals Enterprise Limited
   Ali Towers, 22, Greams Road
   Chennai.600 006

8.Mr.Deepak Vaidya
   Director (& Nominee of Apollo
   Infrastructure Projects Finance Company Ltd.)
   Schroders Capital Partners (Asia) Pvt. Ltd.
   906, Maker Chamber V.Nariman Point
   Mumbai-400 020

9.Mr.H.Kaihara
   Director (& Nominee of Marubeni Corporation)
   a Corporation organised under the laws of
   Japan and having its Principal Office at
   4-2, Ohtemachi, 1-Chome
   Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo, Japan.



10. Mr.Y.Yokota
      Director (& Nominee of Marubeni Corporation)
      a Corporation organised under the laws of
      Japan and having its Principal Office at
      4-2, Ohtemachi, 1-Chome
      Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

11.Mr.Satish Chandra
      Director (& Nominee of Marubeni Corporation)
      a Corporation organised under the laws of
      Japan and having its Principal Office at
      4-2, Ohtemachi, 1-Chome
      Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
                                                        .. Respondents
        (respondents 3 to 11 are given up)

        Appeal against the order dated  5.7.2004  made  in  C.A.No.62/2004  in
C.P.No.8/2004  on  the  file  of  the  Company Law Board, Additional Principal
Bench, Chennai.

!Mr.Udaya Holla, :  Counsel for appellant
Mr.Aravind Dattar Senior Advocates, for M/s.Chitra Narayanan,
&Rishi Kumar Dugar

^Dr.A.M.Singhvi,                :  For respondents 1 and 2
Mr.Man Mohan    Senior Advocates,
Assisted by Mrs.Ritu Bhalla,    Mr.  Balaji Sathish Parasaran & Mr.Rahul
Balaji, for     :  R3 to R11 given up




:JUDGMENT
K.GOVINDARAJAN,J.

The appellant having aggrieved by the order dated 5.7.2004, passed by the Company Law Board, (hereinafter called "CLB"), rejecting their application filed in C.A.No.62/2004 in C.P.No.8/2004, preferred the above appeal. 2. The appellant-company established a gas and naphtha fired combined cycle power generation plant at Pillaiperumalnallur in Government of Tamil Nadu. Respondents 1 and 2 are having 46% paid up capital of the Company (26% and 20% respectively). The 3rd respondent-company and the 4th respondent are holding 28% and 26% paid up capital respectively. The 5th respondent is the Managing Director of the appellant Company. Respondents 6 to 8 are Directors of the appellant-company nominated by the 3rd respondent herein. Respondents 9 and 10 are the Directors nominated by the 4th respondent herein. The financing companies, namely, I.D.B.I., and L.I.C., have nominated one Director each. They are not parties to the proceedings. Since the dispute is only between the appellant-company and respondents 1 and 2, the appellant-company has given up respondents 3 to 11, though they have been added in the appeal as respondents. 3. The appellant-company entered into a Power Purchase Agreement, (hereinafter called "PPA"), with the Tamil Nadu Electricity Board, ( hereinafter called "TNEB") on 3rd January 1997, as the appellantcompany has to sell to the TNEB, capacity and net electrical output of the power generating facility pursuant to the terms and conditions set forth in the said agreement. 4. The PPA among other clauses provides payment security mechanism as follows:"(a) direct payments; (b) letter of credit; (c) An Escrow account and hypothecation of TNEB's receivables deposited in such account; (d) guarantee by the State of Tamil Nadu through a sovereign guarantee ("the GOTN"

Guarantee") in favour of the appellant- company guaranteeing the TNEB's payment obligations".
According to respondents 1 and 2, TNEB, has not only failed to discharge their obligation under the agreement regarding payment security mechanism but also failed to pay a sum of Rs.468.88 crores ( approximately) as on 31st January 2004 towards supply of power by the appellant-company. Since November 2001, the appellant-company had written to TNEB, regarding letter of credit and escrow accounts but no response had been received. In spite of that, the management of the appellant-company did not take any legal action against the TNEB. Since the Company's right to recover the money would become time-barred at the end of 3 years from 26th March 2001, an issue was raised by the nominee director of the 2nd respondent at the 50th Board meeting held on 30th December 2003. 5. Stating that there are some acts of omission and commission and mismanagement of the Company, Company Petition in C.P.No.8/2004 was filed claiming several reliefs as sought for in the petition. Suffice to mention the following relief alone for the purpose of the present case:-

"a(ii) initiating and continuing proceedings qua TNEB and Government of Tamil Nadu for and on behalf of the company with respect to the Company's right under the PPA and GOTN guarantee".
The interim relief also is sought for which is as follows:"a(i) Invoke the alternate dispute resolution remedy clause, PPA dated 3.1.1997 for and on behalf of the company and forthwith initiate the proceedings as contemplated therein".

Such a prayer is sought for to enforce clause 16.1 and 16.2 of the PPA. The CLB in the order dated 9.3.2004 declined to grant the interim relief and accepting the contentions of the appellant-company that any extreme measures against TNEB would have disastrous effects on the very business prospects of the company and also on the basis of sequence of events which show the cautious approach of the Board of Directors of the company. 6. On the ground that the Company's right would become time-barred at the end of 3 years from 26th March 2001, the nominee directors of respondents 1 and 2 proposed two resolutions in their letter dated 12 th March 2004 for the 51st Board of Directors meeting scheduled for 20 th March 2004 wherein they proposed as follows:"Resolved that the Company do hereby invoke the Alternate Dispute Resolution provisions under the PPA dated 3.1.1997 for and on behalf of the Company and issue the invocation letter on or before March 26, 20 04 with respect to the issuance of the Letter of Credit, the implementation of the Escrow Account and all unpaid amounts owing by TNEB under the PPA; Resolved further that the Managing Director be and are hereby authorized and directed to forthwith initiate the proceedings as contemplated thereunder." Though the said resolutions were taken up for discussion and at the Board meeting the said nominee directors placed on record for the consideration of the Board the legal opinions obtained by them regarding limitations, the majority of the Directors of the Board refused to invoke the legal remedies available to the Company and the resolution proposed were defeated by a vote of 8:5. 7. So, again respondents 1 and 2 herein moved interim application No.38/2004 before the CLB in C.P.No.8/2004 seeking the following prayer:"a. Authorise Mr.Jenson and Mr.Sirse, directors of the company sufficiently within the period of limitation expiring on 26.3.04 as stated hereinabove to represent the Company and forthwith initiate, institute and prosecute the dispute resolution mechanism under the PPA on behalf of the Company against TNEB seeking redressal and remedies for all breaches of the PPA by TNEB;

b. Direct the Company to render all assistance as required and asked for by the aforenamed Directors to give effect to prayer (a) above;

c. Direct the Company to bear the costs and expenses incurred by Mr. Jensen and Mr.Sirse in respect of prayer (a) above;

d. Grant ad interim relief in terms of prayers (a) to (c) above, and confirm the same on return of notice;

e. Award costs of this Application to the petitioners; and f. Pass such further orders as this Hon'ble Tribunal may deem fit."

The CLB in the order dated 25th March 2004, refused to grant interim relief as sought for. Such a refusal was on the basis that the CLB cannot interfere with the business, judgment and decision of the Directors, unless there is evidence that they acted in bad faith or no sensible Board of Directors would reasonably have come to the decision which the Company Directors reached. The decision of the majority of Directors not to bring proceedings to enforce obligation of TNEB in favour of the Company is not attributed to the Directors' inaction on account of mala fide reasons and it is not for the CLB to interpret the validity period of the PPA with reference to law of limitation, as TNEB is not bound for any such interpretation. It is represented that aggrieved by that order, an appeal was filed, but it has to see the light of the day.

8. On the same day, namely, 25.3.2004, respondents 1 and 2 initiated proceedings invoking arbitration clause in the PPA by filing the request for arbitration in accordance with Art.3 of ICC Rules of Arbitration. It is relevant to mention here that such a proceeding was taken by respondents 1 and 2 in the name of the appellant-company. Pursuant to the same, a letter was sent to TNEB on 31.3.2004 to provide their comments on or before 30th April 2004. Knowing the same, the appellant-company sent a communication on 14.4.2004 stating that respondents 1 and 2 have made the request which is unauthorised and invalid and the appellant-company has not made any request for any arbitration and so the arbitration proceedings need not be proceeded with. Thereafter, the appellant-company filed Company Application in C.A.No.62/2004 in C.P.No.8/2004 seeking prayer as follows:-

"(a) to grant interim injunction restraining the Respondents/ Petitioners from further proceeding with ICC Case No.13218/MS now pending on the file of the ICC International Court of Arbitration, Paris."
Though the CLB granted interim order initially not to proceed with the arbitration proceedings pending Application, in the order dated 5.7.2004, dismissed the petition holding that the nature of proceedings and the relief claimed at the CLB are distinct from those made before ICC Arbitral Tribunal and the appellant-company did not prove the prima facie case or the balance of convenience and established any irreversible prejudice that may be suffered by the appellant-company in the event of not granting any such injunction. Aggrieved against the same, the appellant-company has preferred the above Appeal.

9. Mr.Udaya Holla, Learned Senior Counsel appearing for the appellant submitted that the Company could not take derivative action against the TNEB to recover the amount payable by them and also to insist to provide payment security mechanism in a stringent manner as claimed by the minority shareholders taking into consideration the fact that they have to solely rely on the TNEB to sell the power and the TNEB is the sole purchaser of the power generated by the Company. Though the I.D.B.I., and the L.I.C., have extended the loan facility exceeding 1,000 crores and nominees of those lenders in the Board also supported the decision of other directors except the nominee directors of respondents 1 and 2, considering the consequences of any action against the TNEB which would ruin the Company and affect the working relationship of the appellant-company with the TNEB. Learned Senior Counsel further submitted that if the TNEB discontinued the purchase of power from the appellant-company, it would neither be possible to get third party purchaser for 300 Mega Watts of power generated by the Company. According to the learned Senior Counsel, such a decision by the Board taken not to proceed against the TNEB, was a commercial decision considering the divergent opinions available before them. Though there is a delay in settlement of the outstanding by the TNEB, according to the learned Senior Counsel, there is no allegation of misappropriation of the Company's fund. It is his further submission that the Courts cannot interfere with the business, judgment and decisions of the Directors unless it is established that the Board of Directors acted in bad faith or such a decision was not taken reasonably. It cannot be said that the Directors of the Company have committed breach of their duties in taking such decision. Respondents 1 and 2 have also not questioned the bona fides of the Directors in deciding so. Referring to the 50th and 51st Board meeting, learned Senior Counsel further submitted that the Board of Directors approached the issue cautiously after weighing the pros and cons of any far reaching recovery measure against the TNEB and took a decision that such a derivative action against TNEB, cannot be taken and rejected the request of the nominee Directors of respondents 1 and

2. On earlier occasion the CLB on the basis of the said decision, refused to interfere with the said decision of the Board of Directors.

10. Pointing out the prayer in the Company Petition No.8/2004 and Interim relief sought for seeking permission to invoke GOTN guarantee for and on behalf of the Company and to forthwith initiate any proceedings and the order dated 9.3.2004, the CLB refusing to grant interim order and the order in Application No.38/2004 dated 25.3.2004 in which the CLB rejected finally the interim relief as sought for by the Applicant, the learned Senior Counsel appearing for the appellant submitted that having suffered such an order, respondents 1 and 2 should not have initiated arbitration proceedings before the International Court of Arbitral Tribunal, ( hereinafter called "ICC") on the same day contrary to the decision of the CLB and so such a proceeding is oppressive in nature and cannot be allowed to proceed further. Referring to the order of the CLB, on merits, learned Senior Counsel submitted that though prima facie case and balance of convenience are also established, the CLB erroneously rejected the application seeking an order of anti suit injunction. Learned Senior Counsel also referred to clause 14.3 of the shareholders agreement dated 24.11.1995 in support of his submission that the shareholders are prohibited from taking any action in the name of or on behalf of any party to the agreement, as the parties to the agreement on independent entities engaged in the conduct of other one's business. On that basis, learned Senior Counsel submitted that respondents 1 and 2 cannot initiate arbitration proceedings in the name of the appellant-company without even getting authorisation for the same. According to the learned Senior Counsel, the findings of the CLB that the relief sought for in the Company Petition filed under Sec.398 read with Sections 402, 403 and 235 of the Companies Act and the dispute raised before the ICC Arbitral Tribunal are distinct cannot be sustained in law. According to him, such finding is given without properly understanding the relief sought for in the main Company Petition. If ultimately, the Tribunal comes to the conclusion that no such proceeding need be taken against the TNEB, then the proceedings taken before the ICC Arbitral Tribunal cannot have any legal sanction. Learned Senior Counsel further submitted that the Tribunal is not correct in holding that there is no prima facie case or the balance of convenience in favour of the appellant and they had not established any irreversible prejudice that may be suffered by the applicant in the event of not granting any such injunction. With respect to the jurisdiction of the CLB, learned Senior Counsel referred to Regulation 44 of the CLB Regulation 1991 and powers vested under Sec.403 of the Companies Act to grant an order of anti-suit injunction. He further submitted that anti-suit injunction is only against the party and it cannot be construed as injunction granted against the ICC Arbitral Tribunal. Learned Senior Counsel has cited a number of decisions which would be dealt with hereunder in support of his submission regarding the scope of anti-suit injunction and the powers of the CLB to grant such relief. 11 The learned Senior Counsel further submitted that the respondents have invoked the arbitration proceedings on the same basis on which the Company Petition was filed and arbitration proceedings have not been taken in the name of minority shareholders to invoke the exception to the principles laid down in Foss v. Harbottle, (1843) 2 Hare 461 : (67 ER 189), but only on behalf of the Company as if the Company has invoked arbitration proceedings. While dealing with the power of the appellate court, he submitted that the appellate court cannot close its eyes even if the order of the CLB cannot be sustained in law. He further submitted that arbitration proceedings which is taken without the consent of the appellant-company is detrimental to the interest of the Company. When the respondents 1 and 2 are ignoring the earlier orders of the CLB, the appellant-company is entitled to get an order of injunction against the respondents 1 and 2 from proceeding further with respect to the arbitration proceedings. Even if such injunction is granted, no prejudice would be caused to the respondents 1 and 2 as they have already initiated the proceedings within time to avoid expiry of period of limitation even according to their calculation. Further, due to subsequent developments, namely, a communiction dated 30.8.2004, the period of limittion is extended. 12. Dr.Singhvi, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the respondents 1 and 2 submitted that the actions, namely, the earlier actions by the respondents 1 and 2 approaching the Board of Directors and the CLB are different and distinct actions and cannot be relied upon to contend that respondents 1 and 2 are estopped from invoking the arbitration clause under Clause No.16.2 of the PPA, before the ICC Arbitral Tribunal. According to him, before the Board, the respondents requested to take action against the TNEB to recover the amount and to insist the compliances of the Clauses in the agreement regarding payment security mechanism. Even before the CLB, the respondents have approached them, only as Directors of the Company, but the said action cannot take away the substantial right under the Common Law remedy to recover the amount from the TNEB by way of derivative action by minority shareholders. According to the learned Senior Counsel, unless such action is not taken, the claim would become time-barred, and merely because the CLB passed the order on 25.3.2004, it cannot be said that the respondents proceeded with the arbitration proceedings on the same day as if the respondents waited for that order. According to the learned Senior counsel, if such action is not taken immediately, the proceedings would become time barred. Learned Senior Counsel also submitted that in view of the exception to the principles laid down in Foss vs. Harbottle (supra), the minority shareholders are entitled to sue the arbitration proceedings in the name of the Company as the majority shareholders are not willing to take such proceedings. It is also submitted that such proceedings were taken only in the interest of the Company to recover the arrears of Rs.468.88 crores especially when the TNEB has not complied with the payment security mechanism contemplated under the PPA. He further submitted that in spite of the order passed by the CLB, respondents 1 and 2 can go for arbitration, as such proceedings have been taken only in the capacity as minority shareholders and also on the basis of the exception to the principles laid down in Foss vs. Harbottle case (supra). He also pointed out that parties in the arbitration proceedings are different from the parties before the CLB and the CLB cannot adjudicate such a claim which was made before the ICC Arbitral Tribunal. He also pointed out that the TNEB has not raised any objection regarding the sustainability of the arbitration proceedings except the objections regarding the maintainability of the arbitration proceedings by minority shareholders and the ICC Arbitral Tribunal has also framed an issue regarding the same which has to be decided only by the ICC Arbitral Tribunal. In view of Clause 16 of the PPA, the ICC alone is having sole and exclusive natural jurisdiction to decide the issue raised before the ICC Arbitral Tribunal. So, the CLB which is not having jurisdiction to decide such issue is an unnatural forum and hence it cannot grant anti suit injunction against exclusive and natural forum as held in Modi Entertainment Network v. W.S.G.Crcket Pte.Ltd., (2003) 4 SCC 341. Learned Senior Counsel further submitted that the argument made on behalf of the appellant to the effect that if the Company proceeds against the TNEB, TNEB will stop purchase of power and thereby they have to close the industry, is not based on any pleading or material. Learned Senior Counsel further submitted that even otherwise, the TNEB can stop purchase of power if they are able to get power for lesser price from others and only to avoid the same, respondents 1 and 2 have insisted the Company to change over to the method of production of power and since the same has not been considered, the respondents have filed the Company Petition under Sec.398 of the Companies Act. While replying to the submission of the learned Senior counsel appearing for the appellant that other Companies supplying power to the TNEB are not insisting the dues and also to implement the payment security mechanism, learned Senior Counsel submitted that the appellant-company has the highest outstanding with the TNEB, namely 76% of the outstanding and merely because others are not taking steps to secure the outstanding, it cannot be said that the appellant-company has to keep quiet.

13. With respect to the inherent power of the CLB, Learned Senior Counsel appearing for respondents 1 and 2 submitted that such a power cannot be used against the natural forum and also the proceedings taken by the respondents 1 and 2 was only in the interest of the Company and not to make gain by the respondents 1 and 2 themselves. It is also submitted that the inherent power can be used only with respect to unoccupied field. But, in the present case, the right to proceed with the arbitration proceedings is on th e basis of Clause 16.2 of the PPA and so it is occupied by contract and thereby the CLB cannot exercise its discretion. Even if direction as sought for by respondents 1 and 2 to take arbitration proceedings by the CLB was given, such proceedings would be only regular action in appointing arbitrator under the agreement by the appellant-company and it cannot be construed as a derivative action by minority shareholders. Since the present action taken by respondents 1 and 2 is nothing but derivative action on the basis of the exception to the principles of the case in Foss vs. Harbottle (supra), for which the permission of the CLB need not be obtained. He further submitted that in the Company Petition filed by the respondents 1and 2, the appellant cannot sustain their Application to get orders against the respondents 1 and

2. If the prayer is granted by the CLB as sought for by the appellant, it is of permanent nature and thereby the remedy for the minority shareholders are prevented in perpetuity to pursue their remedy to safeguard their interest. He also pointed out that the prayer 'b' in the Application is not the subject matter in the Company Petition. It is his further case that the appellants have not made out any pleading which is required to grant anti-suit injunction as mentioned in the decision in MODI's case (supra). He also pointed out the portions in the petition filed by the appellants in support of his submission that the appellants have admitted that the action now taken by the respondents is derivative action. According to the learned Senior Counsel, such derivative action by the minority shareholders can be taken only if the CLB refuses to grant permission to proceed with the arbitration proceedings. Since the Company itself has taken arbitration proceedings, though at the instance of minority shareholders, if injunction is granted as sought for, even the Company itself cannot invoke Clause 16.2 of the PPA.

14. With reference to the scope of appeal, learned Senior Counsel appearing for respondents 1 and 2 submitted that if the CLB has given reasonings based on materials, this Court cannot substitute another reason to reverse the orders of the CLB though such exercise is possible. Learned Senior Counsel further submitted that even under the provisions of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996, stay cannot be granted to stall the arbitration proceedings. Referring to clause 1 4.3 of the PPA, learned Senior Counsel submitted that the same is not applicable to the present proceedings and such a clause is available only in the different agreement entered into between the shareholders, whereas the right to take arbitration proceedings is available in the PPA. According to the learned Senior Counsel, even if such a clause is available, the respondents 1 and 2 can invoke their common law right to take arbitration proceedings. The appellate court can interfere with the order of the CLB only if the findings given by the CLB are reversible or perverse. Referring to the letter dated 30.8.20 04 produced by the Learned Senior Counsel appearing for the appellant, Dr.Singhvi, learned Senior Counsel appearing for respondents 1 and 2 submitted that it is only a self- serving document and the same has been produced in the midst of arguments and the said document cannot make the present application infructuous.

15. The question of law raised in this case can be captioned as follows: (1) Whether the CLB is having any inherent powers to grant anti-suit injunction and if it is so whether such power was not properly exercised in the present case on the basis of established principles? (2) Whether the respondents 1 and 2 are prohibited under Clause 14.3 of the shareholders agreement dated 24.11.1998 or barred by the principles of Res judicata to invoke the arbitration proceedings before the ICC Arbitral Tribunal under clause 16.2 of the PPA? (3) Whether the petition in C.A.No.62/2004 filed by the appellant is sustainable in law? (4) Whether the order of the CLB rejecting the request for antisuit injunction is sustainable in law?

16. Before dealing with the above questions, we are inclined to extract the findings given by the CLB. Additional Principal Bench, Chennai, to reject C.A.No.62/2004 in the order impugned dated 5.7.2004 , for anti-suit injunction as sought for by the appellant on the following grounds: i) The orders dated 9.3.2004 and 25.4.2004 passed by the CLB in interim application and in Company Application No.38/2004 are not a bar to initiate a derivative action by the minority shareholders in the name of the Company before the ICC Arbitral Tribunal against the TNEB invoking arbitration clause No.16.2 in the PPA, as such a right was not at all invoked before the CLB, nor argued nor considered nor prohibited by the CLB, while declining the interim reliefs, on 9.3.20 04 and 25.3.2004; ii) As laid down in Modi's case, the CLB is not having natural jurisdiction to deal with the matter pending before ICC Arbitral Tribunal and so it cannot grant injunction against the party who took the proceedings before the forum having natural and exclusive jurisdiction and in the foreign court of choice of parties; iii)The CLB has no interest nor connection with the dispute in relation to the PPA to justify the interference with the ICC arbitral Tribunal. iv) There is neither comity nor commonality of parties in the proceedings before the CLB and the ICC arbitral Tribunal; v) The parties in dispute have exclusively entrusted the jurisdiction in relation to any dispute arising out of the PPA in favour of the ICC Arbitral Tribunal explicitly excluding the jurisdiction of the Indian courts as well as the Indian Arbitration Law and any dispute in relation to the PPA has been kept outside the purview of the CLB.

vi) While the exclusive jurisdiction of the ICC Arbitral Tribunal to adjudicate any dispute in relation to the PPA, including the issue as to whether the respondents 1 and 2 as minority shareholders, are entitled to invoke any derivative action in the name of the Company against the TNEB, is far from the doubt, the CLB can have no domain or concurrent jurisdiction over the resolution of any dispute arising out the PPA. Vii) While considering the scope of clause 14.03 of the shareholders agreement, it is found that the prohibition sought to be enforced among the shareholders is only in relation to the conduct of their own business and it cannot override the established common law right available to minority actions as derivative action under the rule of exception to the principles in Foss v. Harbottle. Viii) The CLB which is not being vested with natural jurisdiction can neither exercise the inherent powers under Regulation 44 of the CLB Regulations, 1991 nor powers vested under Sec.403 of the Companies Act to grant any anti-suit injunction, especially when the discretion has to be exercised according to the Rules of reason, justice and law, without any violation of the principles of the Companies Act. ix) While the reliefs under Sec.397 and 398 of the Act as sought for in the Company Petition are statutory reliefs, the reliefs which may be granted by the ICC Arbitral Tribunal are pursuant to the contractual obligations between the parties. x) The nature of the proceedings and the reliefs claimed at the CLB are separate and distinct from those proceedings made before the ICC Arbitral Tribunal

xi) The appellant-company herein have not established that there is any prima facie case or the balance of convenience in favour of the applicant before the CLB nor established any irreparable prejudice that may be suffered by the appellant-company in the event of nongrant of anti-suit injunction.

17. Again, before dealing with the issues raised in the present case, the scope, the power and jurisdiction of this Court to deal with the appeal has to be gone into.

18. The above appeal is preferred under Sec.10-F of the Companies Act, 1956. Under the said provision, any person aggrieved by the decision or order of the CLB is given liberty to prefer an appeal to the High Court on any question of law arising out of that order. So, now we have to decide on the basis of the above said provision, regarding the scope of our jurisdiction while dealing with the order of the CLB, dated 5.7.2004. Even according to the learned Senior Counsel appearing for the appellant, the CLB is only exercising its inherent and discretionary power either to grant or reject the prayer for injunction. Only if it is established that the CLB exercised such power arbitrarily or capriciously or perversely or contrary to the settled principles of law regulating grant or refusal of interlocutory injunction, this Court can interfere with the said order. But if such power was exercised reasonably and in a judicial manner by the CLB, the appellate court is not justified in interfering with the said order by taking a different view. 19. This view of ours is supported by the decision of the Apex Court in the decision in Laxmikant V. Patel v. Chetanbhat Shah, AIR 2002 S.C. 275, in which it is held as follows:"17. We are conscious of the law that this Court would not ordinarily interfere with the exercise of discretion in the matter of grant of temporary injunction by the High Court and the trial Court and substitute its own discretion therefor except where the discretion has been shown to have been exercised arbitrarily or capriciously or perversely or where the order of the Court under scrutiny ignores the settled principles of law regulating grant or refusal of interlocutory injunction. An appeal against exercise of discretion is said to be an appeal on principle. Appellate Court will not reassess the material and seek to reach a conclusion different from the one reached by the Court below solely on the ground that if it had considered the matter at the trial stage it would have come to a contrary conclusion. If the discretion has been exercised by the trial Court reasonably and in a judicial manner the fact that the appellate Court would have taken a different view may not justify interference with the trial Court' s exercise of discretion. However, the present one is a case falling within the well accepted exceptions. Neither the trial Court nor the High Court have kept in view and applied their mind to the relevant settled principles of law governing the grant or refusal of the interlocutory injunction in trade mark and trade name disputes. A refusal to grant an injunction in spite of the availability of facts, which are prima facie established by overwhelming evidence and material available on record justifying the grant thereof, occasion a failure of justice and such injury to the plaintiff as would not be capable of being undone at a later stage. The discretion exercised by the trial Court and the High Court against the plaintiff is neither reasonable nor judicious. The grant of interlocutory injunction to the plaintiff could not have been refused, therefore, it becomes obligatory on the part of this Court to interfere."

20. In the above said decision, the earlier decision of the Apex Court in Wander Ltd. v. Antox India, P. Ltd., 1990 (Supp) SCC 727, has been referred to. While dealing with the scope and nature of appeals and the powers of the appellate court in the said decision, it is held as follows:-

"13. On a consideration of the matter, we are afraid, the appellate bench fell into error on two important propositions. The first is a misdirection in regard to the very scope and nature of the appeals before it and the limitations on the powers of the appellate court to substitute its own discretion in an appeal preferred against a discretionary order. The second pertains to the infirmities in the ratiocination as to the quality of Antox's alleged user of the trademark on which the passing-off action is founded. We shall deal with these two separately. 14. The appeals before the Division Bench were against the exercise of discretion by the Single Judge. In such appeals, the appellate court will not interfere with the exercise of discretion of the court of first instance and substitute its own discretion except where the discretion has been shown to have been exercised arbitrarily, or capriciously or perversely or where the court had ignored the settled principles of law regulating grant or refusal of interlocutory injunctions. An appeal against exercise of discretion is said to be an appeal on principle. Appellate court will not reassess the material and seek to reach a conclusion different from the one reached by the court below if the one reached by that court was reasonably possible on the material. The appellate court would normally not be justified in interfering with the exercise of discretion under appeal solely on the ground that if it had considered the matter at the trial stage it would have come to a contrary conclusion. If the discretion has been exercised by the trial court reasonably and in a judicial manner the fact that the appellate court would have taken a different view may not justify interference with the trial court' s exercise of discretion. After referring to these principles Gajendragadkar, J., in Printers (Mysore) Private Ltd. v. Pothan Josep, (1960 ) 3 SCR 713: AIR 1960 SC 1156 (SCR 721) " ... These principles are well established, but as has been observed by Viscount Simon in Charles Osenton & Co. v. Jhanaton, 1942 AC 130 , ' .... the law as to the reversal by a court of appeal of an order made by a judge below in the exercise of his discretion is well established, and any difficulty that arises is due only to the application of well settled principles in an individual case'." The appellate judgment does not seem to defer to this principle."
21. The Apex Court in the decision in Santosh Hazari v. Purushottam Tiwari, 2001 AIR SCW 723, had an occasion to deal with the power of the appellate court while considering the scope of Sec.100, Civil Procedure Code. Though the said decision is not with reference to discretionary orders passed in interlocutory application, it has given a formula as to how the appellate court deal with the appeal while reversing the decision of the lower court. In that aspect, we are inclined to extract the relevant portion of the said decision, which is as follows:-

13. In Deputy Commr. Hardoi, in charge Court of Wards, Bharawan Estate v. Rama Krishna Narain, AIR 1953 SC 521, also it was held that a question of law of importance to the parties was a substantial question of law entitling the appellant to certificate under (the then) Section 110 of the Code. 14. A point of law which admits of no two opinions may be a proposition of law but cannot be a substantial question of law. To be ' substantial' a question of law must be debatable, not previously settled by law of the land or a binding precedent, and must have a material bearing on the decision of the case, if answered either way, in so far as the rights of the parties before it are concerned. To be a question of law 'involving in the case' there must be first a foundation for it laid in the pleadings and the question should emerge from the sustainable findings of fact arrived at by Court of facts and it must be necessary to decide that question of law for a just and proper decision of the case. An entirely new point raised for the first time before the High Court is not a question of law involved in the case unless it goes to the root of the matter. It will, therefore, depend on the facts and circumstances of each case whether a question of law is a substantial one and involved in the case, or not; the paramount overall consideration being the need for striking a judicious balance between the indispensable obligation necessity of avoiding prolongation in the life of any lis.
15. A perusal of the judgment of the trial Court shows that it has extensively dealt with the oral and documentary evidence adduced by the parties for deciding the issues on which the parties went to trial. It also found that in support of his plea of adverse possession on the disputed land, the defendant did not produce any documentary evidence while the oral evidence adduced by the defendant was conflicting in nature and hence unworthy of reliance. The first appellate Court has, in a very cryptic manner, reversed the finding on question of possession and dispossession as alleged by the plaintiff as also on the question of adverse possession as pleaded by the defendant. The appellate Court has jurisdiction to reverse or affirm the findings of the trial Court. First appeal is a valuable right of the parties and unless restricted by law, the whole case is therein open for rehearing both on question of fact and law. The judgment of the appellate Court must, therefore, reflect its conscious application of mind, and record findings supported by reasons, on all the issues arising along with the contentions put forth, and pressed by the parties for decision of the appellate Court. The task of an appellate Court affirming the findings of the trial Court is an easier one. The appellate Court agreeing with the view of the trial Court need not restate the effect of the evidence or reiterate the reasons given by the trial Court, expression of general agreement with reasons given by the Court, decision of which is under appeal, would ordinarily suffice (See Girijanandini Devi v. Bijendra Narain Choudhary, AIR 1967 SC 1124). We would, however, like to sound a note of caution. Expression of general agreement with the findings recorded in the judgment under appeal should not be a device or camouflage adopted by the appellate Court for shirking the duty cast on it. While writing a judgment of reversal the appellate Court must remain conscious of two principles. Firstly, the findings of fact based on conflicting evidence arrived at by the trial Court must weigh with the appellate Court, more so when the findings are based on oral evidence recorded by the same presiding Judge who authors the judgment. This certainly does not mean that when an appeal lies on facts, the appellate Court is not competent to reverse a finding of fact arrived at by the trial Judge. As a matter of law if the appraisal of the evidence by the trial Court suffers from a material irregularity or is based on inadmissible evidence or on conjectures and surmises, the appellate Court is entitled to interfere with the finding of fact (See Madhusudan Das v. Smt.Narayani Bai, AIR 1983 SC 114). The rule is  and it is nothing more than a rule of practice  that when there is conflict of oral evidence of the parties on any matter in issue and the decision hinges upon the credibility of witnesses, then unless there is some special feature about the evidence of a particular witness which has escaped the trial Judge's notice or there is a sufficient balance of improbability to displace his opinion as to where the credibility lies, the appellate Court should not interfere with the finding of the trial Judge ona question of fact (See Sarju Pershad Ramdeo Sahu v. Jwaleswari Pratap Narain Singh, AIR 1951 SC 120).
Secondly, while reversing a finding of fact the appellate Court must come into close quarters with the reasoning assigned by the trial Court and then assign its own reasons for arriving at a different finding. This would satisfy the Court hearing a further appeal that the first appellate Court had discharged the duty expected of it. We need only remind the first appellate Courts of the additional obligation cast on them by the scheme of the present Section 100 substituted in the Code. The first appellate Court continues, as before, to be a final Court of facts; pure findings of fact remain immune from challenge before the High Court in second appeal. Now the first appellate Court is also a final Court of law in the sense that its decision on a question of law even if erroneous may not be vulnerable before the High court in second appeal because the jurisdiction of the High Court has now ceased to be available to correct the errors of law or the erroneous findings of the first appellate Court even on questions of law unless such question of law be a substantial one."

22. From the above said decisions, it is clear that this Court can interfere with the order of the CLB only if discretionary/inherent powers of the CLB, is exercised arbitrarily or capriciously or perversely or ignored the settled principles of law in granting interlocutory injunction. We can also interfere with the order if we are able to conclude that the CLB has not exercised its power in granting injunction in spite of the availability of facts which are prima facie established by overwhelming evidence and material available on record justifying the grant thereof and occasioned failure of justice and thereby the appellant sustained irreparable injury, but at the same time the appellate Court cannot reassess the material and reach a conclusion different from one reached by the CLB solely on the ground that if it had considered in a particular manner, it would have come to contrary conclusion. While reversing the order of the CLB, this Court must come into close quarters with the reasonings assigned by the CLB and then this Court has to assign its own reasonings in arriving at a different conclusion. 23. Dr.Singhvi, learned Senior Counsel appearing for respondents 1 and 2, in his own style, while explaining the power of the Appellate court to interfere with the discretionary order of the CLB, relied on the "Carpet Theory", as he mentioned. According to him, if the lower forums have walked through carpet without stepping down from the same, the appellate Court cannot interfere with the order of the said forum. It is not the matter, such a walking is straight or zig-zag. It is only for the appellate Court to see whether the said forum had walked on the carpet or stepped down from the carpet. He refers the carpet to its power or jurisdiction of the forum for disposing of the application for injunction. We have to find out hereinafter whether the CLB had walked through the carpet or stepped out. 24. Now on the basis of the above settled principles of law regarding the power of this Court to deal with the appeal, we are inclined to deal with the case on the basis of the pleadings and argument advanced by the respective learned Senior Counsel. 25. Before dealing with Point No.1, it is beneficial to deal with the scope of "anti-suit injunction" in general which are culled out from various decisions. The same is not defined or dealt with in the Code of Civil Procedure. (i) When a court restrains a party to a suit/proceedings before it from instituting or prosecuting a case in another court, including a foreign court, it is called "anti-suit injunction". (ii) Anti-suit injunction can be issued on the ground of "equity and good conscience".

(iii) Anti-suit injunction can be granted "to avoid injustice". (iv) If foreign proceedings are "oppressive or vexatious". such anti-suit injunction can be granted. (v) To prevent the administration of justice being prevented for unjust ends of justice, anti-suit injunction can be granted with respect to foreign proceedings. (vi) There must be an equity which entitles one party as against the other, to an injunction to restrain the other from proceeding in the foreign court. (vii) To protect the courts' own proceedings and process, antisuit injunction can be granted. (viii) If the bringing of the legal proceedings involved unconscionable conduct or unconscientious exercise of legal right, such antisuit injunction may be granted. (ix) Though the international anti-suit injunction operates only against the parties, it effectively restricts the jurisdiction of a foreign sovereign's courts. (x) International anti-suit injunction can be granted whenever there is a duplication of parties and issues and the court determines with the prosecution of simultaneous proceedings would frustrate the speedy and effective determination of the case.

(xi) There is no precious Rules governing the anti-suit injunction.

(xii) Only in the most compelling circumstances, a court should exercise its discretion to issue an anti-suit injunction. (xiii) Such injunction is required to prevent irreparable and miscarriage of justice and to prevent the litigants' evasion of the important public policies of the forum. (xiv) The Court should exercise such a power granting anti-suit injunction to enjoin foreign suits sparingly and only in very special circumstances. 26. Point No.1 and 4:- The appellant-company filed Application in C.A.No.62/2004 invoking powers under Regulation 44 of the Company Law Board Regulations, 1991, which reads as follows:-

"44. Saving of inherent power of the Bench:- Nothing in these rules shall be deemed to limit or otherwise affect the inherent power of the Bench to make such orders as may be necessary for the ends of justice or to prevent abuse of the process of the Bench."
The CLB is vested with inherent power to exercise even under Sec.4 02(g) of the Companies Act, which reads as follows:402. Without prejudice to the generality of the powers of the ( Tribunal) under Section 397 or 398, any order under either section may provide for (a) .. .. (b) .. .. (c) .. ..

(d) .. .. (e) .. .. (f) .. .. (g) any other matter for which in the opinion of the (Tribunal) it is just and equitable that provision should be made."

27. Regulation No.44 is in para materia to Sec.151 of the Code of Civil Procedure. Sec.151 of the Code reads as follows:-

"151. Saving of inherent powers of Court:- Nothing in this Code shall be deemed to limit or otherwise affect the inherent power of the court to make such orders as may be necessary for the ends of justice or to prevent abuse of the process of the Court."
From the above said Regulation No.44 and the Section 402(g) of the Companies Act, it is clear that the inherent power can be exercised by the CLB to meet the ends of justice and to prevent abuse of the process of the CLB. 28. Courts have held that such inherent power can be exercised in the absence of any express prohibition. In the decision in J.M.D. Syndicate v. I-T. Commr., New Delhi, AIR 1971 S.C. 1348, the Apex Court has held as follows:-

"5. .... In exercising inherent power, the courts cannot override the express provisions of law. Where however, as in the present case, there is no express or implied prohibition in recalling an earlier order made because of the absence of the  party and to directing the disposal of the reference on merits, the courts, in our opinion, should not be loath to exercise such power provided the party concerned approaches the court with due diligence and shows sufficient cause for its non-appearance on the date of hearing."
29. Even in the decision in N.S. Mills v. Union of India, AIR 1976 S.C. 1152, the Apex Court while dealing with the limitation on the powers of the court in exercising inherent powers, has held as follows:-

"6. Rejecting, therefore, the recommendations for solution of the problem arising here, as put forward by counsel for the appellants, we have to devise other measures. We are aware of our limitations: "The judge, even when he is free, is still not wholly free. He is not to innovate at pleasure. He is not a knight-errant roaming at will in pursuit of his own ideal of beauty or of goodness. He is to draw his inspiration from consecrated principles. He is not to yield to spasmodic sentiment, to vague and unregulated benevolence. He is to exercise a discretion informed by tradition, methodized by analogy, disciplined by system, and subordinated to 'the primordial necessity of order in social life.' Wide enough in all conscience is the field of discretion that remains." The difficulty we face here cannot force us to abandon the inherent powers of the Court to do. "The inherent power has its roots in necessity and its  breadth is coextensive with the necessity".
Certainly, we cannot go against any statutory prescription. ......"

30. Even in the decision in Manohar Lal v. Seth Hiralal, AIR 1962 S.C. 527, it is held that the inherent power has not been conferred upon the Court; it is a power inherent in the Court by virtue of its duty to do justice between the parties before the Court. It is also held that when the Code itself recognises the existence of the inherent power of the Court, there is no question of implying any powers outside the limits of the Code. 31. In the decision in Dalpatkumar v. Prahlad Singh, (1992)1 SCC 719 , it is held that grant of injunction is a discretionary one . While holding so, the Apex Court has given guidelines as to the circumstances under which such discretionary relief of injunction should be granted, which is as follows:-

"4. ..(1) there is a serious disputed question to be tried in the suit and that an act, on the facts before the court, there is probability of his being entitled to the relief asked for by the plaintiff/ defendant; (2) the court's interference is necessary to protect the party from the species of injury.
In other words, irreparable injury or damage would ensue before the legal right would be established in trial; and (3) that the comparative hardship or mischief or inconvenience which is likely to occur from withholding the injunction will be greater than that would be likely to arise from granting it."
It is also held that the burden is on the plaintiff to prove that there is "prima facie" case in his favour and also has to satisfy that not granting such an order of injunction by the court would result in "irreparable injury".

32. The learned Senior Counsel appearing for the appellant relied on the decision of the Calcutta High Court (Division Bench) in Debi Jhora Tea Co. v. Barendra Krishna Bhowmick, 1980 (50) Comp.Cases 771, in support of his submission that there can be no limitation on the court's power while acting under Sections 397, 398 and 402 of the Companies Act, 1956, with respect to the power of the CLB to grant injunction. Even in the said decision, it is only held that the intention of the legislature is to confer wide and ample powers upon courts for the regulation of the conduct of the Company's affairs and to provide for any other matter which the court thinks just and equitable to provide for, in the interests of the corporate body and general public. 33. Even in the decision in Grindlays Bank Ltd., v. Industrial Tribunal,1980 (Supp) SCC 420, regarding the availability of the power of the Tribunal in the absence of any express provision, it is held as follows:-

"6. We are of the opinion that the Tribunal had the power to pass the impugned order if it thought fit in the interest of justice. It is true that there is no express provision in the Act or the rules framed thereunder giving the Tribunal jurisdiction to do so. But it is a well known rule of statutory construction that a Tribunal or body should be considered to be endowed with such ancillary or incidental powers as are necessary to discharge its functions effectively for the purpose of doing justice between the parties. In a case of this nature, we are of the view that the Tribunal should be considered as invested with such incidental or ancillary powers unless there is any indication in the statute to the contrary. We do not find any such statutory prohibition.
On the other hand, there are indications to the contrary."
34. Similar view has been taken by the Apex Court in the decision in Union of India v. Paras Laminates (P) Ltd., (1990) 4 SCC 453, holding as follows:-

"8. There is no doubt that the Tribunal functions as a court within the limits of its jurisdiction. It has all the powers conferred expressly by the statute. Furthermore, being a judicial body, it has all those incidental and ancillary powers which are necessary to make fully effective the express grant of statutory powers. Certain powers are recognised as incidental and ancillary, not because they are inherent in the Tribunal, nor because its jurisdiction is plenary, but because it is the legislative intent that the power which is expressly granted in the assigned field of jurisdiction is efficaciously and meaningfully exercised. The powers of the Tribunal are no doubt limited. Its area of jurisdiction is clearly defined, but within the bounds of its jurisdiction, it has all the powers expressly and impliedly granted. The implied grant is, of course, limited by the express grant and, therefore, it can only be such powers as are truly incidental and ancillary for doing all such acts or employing all such means as are reasonably necessary to make the grant effective. As stated in Maxwell on Interpretation of Statutes (11th Edn.) "where an Act confers a jurisdiction, it impliedly also grants the power of doing all such acts, or employing such means, as are essentially necessary to its execution."
35. In the decision of the Apex Court in J.K.Synthetics Ltd. v. C.C.E., (1996) 6 SCC 92 also, similar view is taken, which is extracted hereunder:-

"3. Our attention was invited to the judgment of this Court in ITO v. M.K.Mohammed Kunhi, (1969) 71 ITR 815 : AIR 1969 SC 430, whee the question related to the powers of the Income Tax appellate Tribunal under Section 254 of the Income Tax Act, 1961. Reliance was placed upon Sutherland's Statutory Construction, Third Edn., Domats Civil Law, Vol.I,and Maxwell on Interpretation of Statutes, 11th Edn., to hold that it was a firmly established rule that an express grant of statutory power carried with it, by necessary implication, the authority to use all reasonable means to make such grant effective. The powers which had been conferred upon the Tax Appellate Tribunal were of the widest possible amplitude and carried with them, by necessary implication all powers and duties incidental and necessary to make, the exercise of those powers fully effective. Having regard to its powers under Section 254, it was held that the Tax Appellate Tribunal had impliedly been granted the power of doing all such acts and employing such means as were essential and necessary to its ends. The statutory power carried with it the duty in proper cases to make such order for staying proceedings as would prevent the appeal, if successful, from being rendered nugatory."
From the above said decisions, though it is held that even in the absence of any specific provision, the Courts are having inherent power to grant injunction and such inherent power has been conferred upon the court by virtue of its duty to do justice. We need not go into the said aspect in this case, as Regulation No.44 and Section 402 of the Companies Act contemplate such power on the CLB. So there cannot be any difficulty in accepting the proposition that the CLB is having such inherent power to grant injunction in a given case if it has jurisdiction to deal with the same.

36. But we have to deal with the question whether the CLB is having power to grant injunction as sought for by the appellant-company to stall the arbitration proceedings initiated by respondents 1 and 2 as minority shareholders by way of derivative action initiated before the ICC Arbitral Tribunal, which alone is having jurisdiction to deal with the arbitration proceedings in view of clause 16.2 of the PPA.

37. Learned Senior Counsel appearing for the appellant submitted that it cannot be said that the CLB is not having jurisdiction to grant injunction with respect to arbitration proceedings in question. According to him, it also cannot be said that Courts cannot grant injunction at the instance of Indian Firm restraining the arbitration proceedings initiated in foreign country.

38. In support of his submission, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the appellant relied on the decision in M/s.V.O. Tractoro export, Moscow v. M/s.Tarapore & Co., 1969(3) SCC 562. In the said case, the appellant before the Supreme Court initiated arbitration proceedings before Foreign Trade Arbitration Commission of the U.S.S.R. Chamber of Commerce, Moscow. Before initiation of such proceeding, the respondents before the Apex Court filed a suit on the Original Side of the Madras High Court. After initiating the arbitration proceedings, the appellant entered appearance and contested the suit and filed an application for stay of the suit. Respondents also filed another application for injunction restraining the appellant from taking any part in the arbitration proceedings in Moscow. Learned Single Judge dismissed the application for stay of the suit and granted injunction restraining the appellant from taking part in the proceedings in Moscow. The Division Bench also confirmed the decision of the learned Single Judge. On appeal, the Apex Court found that no case for injunction has been made out and set aside the orders of the High Court and allowed the appeal filed before them. While dealing with the question whether the High Court was justified in granting interim injunction restraining the Russian Firm from proceeding with the arbitration in Moscow, the Apex Court has held as follows:-

"23. The next question is whether the High Court was justified in granting an interim injunction restraining the Russian Firm from proceeding with arbitration at Moscow. The position of the Russian Firm is that neither it nor the Foreign Trade Arbitration Commission of the U.S.S.R. Chamber of Commerce which is seized of the arbitration proceedings is amenable to the jurisdiction of the courts in India. The presence in India of the party sought to be injuncted is a condition pre-requisite for the grant of an injunction. Alternatively, the Indian Firm has been guilty of breach of the agreement to refer the matter to arbitration at Moscow and therefore it has disentitled itself to the exercise of the Court's discretion in its favour in the matter of granting an injunction. 24. Now, it is common ground that the point about the Russian Firm having no representative in India was not agitated before the High Court. The position taken up in the plaint was that the Russian Firm was carrying on business in the U.S.S.R., and at Madras. The controversy before the High Court appears to have been confirmed only to what is stated in Para 5 of the counter-affidavit of the Russian Firm, namely, that in the presence of the Arbitration agreement in the contract entered into between the parties, the only proper remedy for the Indian Firm was to submit the disputes to the arbitration tribunal at Moscow. 25. The rule as stated in Halsbury's Laws of England, Vol.21, at page 407, is that with regard to foreign proceedings, the court will restrain a person within its jurisdiction from instituting or prosecuting suits in a foreign court whenever the circumstances of the case make such an interposition necessary or proper. This jurisdiction will be exercised whenever there is vexation or oppression. In England, courts, have been very cautious and have largely refrained from granting stay of proceedings in foreign courts (Cheshire's Private Industrial Law, 7th Ed., pages 108-110). The injunction is, however, issued against a party and not a foreign court. 26. Although it is a moot point whether Section 35 of the Arbitration Act, 1940, will be applicable to the present case in Shiva Jute Baling Ltd., v. Hindley & Company Limited, (1960) 1 SCR 569, it was assumed that Section 35 applied to protocol arbitration and the principle embodied in that section cannot be completely ignored while considering the question of injunction. According to that section no reference nor award can be rendered invalid by reason only of the commencement of legal proceedings upon the subject of the reference, but when legal proceedings upon the whole of the subject-matter of the reference have been commenced between all the parties to the reference and a notice thereof has been given to the arbitrators or umpire, all further proceedings in a pending reference shall, unless a stay of proceedings is granted under Section 34, be invalid.
27. If the venue of the arbitration proceedings had been in India and if the provisions of the Arbitration Act of 1940, had been applicable, the suit and the arbitration proceedings could not have been allowed to go on simultaneously and either the suit would have been stayed under Section 34 or if it was not stayed, and the arbitration were notified about the pendency of the suit, they would have had to stay the arbitration proceedings because under Section 35 such proceedings would become invalid if there was identity between the subjectmatter of the reference and the suit. In the present case, when the suit is not being stayed under Section 3 of the Act it would be contrary to the principle underlying Section 35 not to grant an injunction restraining the Russian Firm from proceeding with the arbitration at Moscow. The principle essentially is that the arbitrators should not proceed with the arbitration side by side in rivalry or in competition as if it were a Civil Court."
39. As per the above decision, there cannot be any doubt that order of injunction can be granted even with respect to arbitration proceedings. But, even from the above said decision, it is clear that the petition for injunction was entertained in a suit and such an order of injunction was granted only because the action of the respondents therein was vexation or oppression and it is held that while granting such order, courts should be very cautious and have largely refrained from granting stay of proceedings of foreign courts. The Apex Court also found that such an order is necessary on the basis of the principle that the arbitrators should not proceed with the arbitration, side by side in rivalry or on competition as if it were a Civil Court. In the present case, such a situation is not available. The proceedings taken by the respondents 1 and 2 cannot be said as vexation or oppression. It is relevant to mention here that the amount which is due from the TNEB, is not in dispute and availability of clause 16.2 in the PPA to invoke the arbitration proceedings is also not in dispute. The respondents, as minority shareholders, took derivative action initiating arbitration proceedings in accordance with clause 16.2 of the PPA, that too, only after the Company failed to invoke such arbitration proceedings, though such right is given under clause 16.2 of the PPA especially when the TNEB failed to pay the amount and also not complied with payment security mechanism as contemplated under the PPA to recover the money to the appellant-company which is due from the TNEB. There is no parallel proceeding with respect to the same, is pending in India so as to prevent the respondents for initiating arbitration proceedings. So, the decision reported in the decision in 1969(3) SCC 562 (supra) cannot be relied on to say that in the present case CLB should have granted injunction.

40. In the decision in Modi Entertainment Network v. W.S.G.Cricket Pte. Ltd., (2003) 4 SCC 341, the Apex Court had dealt with similar issue regarding the power of issuing anti suit injunction to restrict the proceedings in foreign court. In para 24 of the decision, the Apex Court has laid down the principles in exercising the discretion to grant injunction which read as follows:-

"24. From the above discussion the following principles emerge: (1) In exercising discretion to grant an anti-suit injunction the court must be satisfied of the following aspects: (a) the defendant, against whom, injunction is sought, is amendable to the personal jurisdiction of the court;
(b) If the injunction is declined, the ends of justice will be defeated and injustice will be perpetuated; and (c) the principle of comity  respect for the court in which the commencement or continuance of action/proceeding is sought to be restrained  must be borne in mind. (2) In a case where more forums than one are available, the court in exercise of its discretion to grant anti-suit injunction will examine as to which is the appropriate forum (forum conveniens) having regard to the convenience of the parties and may grant anti-suit injunction in regard to proceedings which are oppressive or vexatious or in a forum non-conveniens. (3) Where jurisdiction of a court is invoked on the basis of jurisdiction clause in a contract, the recitals therein in regard to exclusive or non-exclusive jurisdiction of the court of choice of the parties are not determinative but are relevant factors and when a question arises as to the nature of jurisdiction agreed to between the parties the court has to decide the same on a true interpretation of the contract on the facts and in the circumstances of each case. (4) A court of natural jurisdiction will not normally grant antisuit injunction against a defendant before it where parties have agreed to submit to the exclusive jurisdiction of a court including a foreign court, a forum of their choice in regard to the commencement or continuance of proceedings in the court of choice, save in an exceptional case for good and sufficient reasons, with a view to prevent injustice in circumstances such as which permit a contracting party to be relieved of the burden of the contract; or since the date of the contract the circumstances or subsequent events have made it impossible for the party seeking injunction to prosecute the case in the court of choice because the essence of the jurisdiction of the court does not exist or because of a vis major or force majeure and the like. (5) Where parties have agreed, under a non-exclusive jurisdiction clause, to approach a neutral foreign forum and be governed by the law applicable to it for the resolution of their disputes arising under the contract, ordinarily no anti-suit injunction will be granted in regard to proceedings in such a forum conveniens and favoured forum as it shall be presumed that the parties have thought over their convenience and all other relevant factors before submitting to the non-exclusive jurisdiction of the court of their choice which cannot be treated just as an alternative forum. (6) A party to the contract containing jurisdiction clause cannot normally be prevented from approaching the court of choice of the parties as it would amount to aiding breach of the contract; yet when one of the parties to the jurisdiction clause approaches the court of choice in which exclusive or non-exclusive jurisdiction is created, the proceedings in that court cannot per se be treated as vexatious or oppressive nor can the court be said to be forum non-conveniens. (7) The burden of establishing that the forum of choice is a forum non-conveniens or the proceedings therein are oppression or vexatious would be on the party so contending to aver and prove the same."
41. The learned Senior Counsel appearing for the appellant-company submitted that the Apex Court in the above case has come to the conclusion that there is no valid reason to grant anti-suit injunction and such conclusion is on the basis of the facts of that case, and also no valid reason was given or merits were not made out to grant such injunction. But the principles laid down in Modi's case, (2003) 4 SCC 341, have to be relied on, regarding the issuance of anti-suit injunction and the same have to be applied to test the correctness of exercise of discretion by the CLB. 42. Learned Senior Counsel appearing for the appellant relied on the decision in O.N.G.C. v. Western Co. of North America, (1987) 1 SCC 4 96, in which the Apex Court, relying on the decision in (1969)3 SCC 5 62 (supra) and other decisions found, on the basis of the facts of that case, that the said case was one of those rare cases where the Court would be failing in its duty if it hesitates in granting the order. On that basis, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the appellant submitted that applying the said principle, the Company Law Board should have granted injunction as sought for. In the said case before the Apex Court, the respondent was restrained from proceeding further with an action instituted by it before the U.S. Court against the appellant-O.N.G.C. The appellant and the respondent entered into a drilling contract. The said contract provided for arbitration for any difference arising out of the agreement being referred to arbitrators, which is governed by the Indian Arbitration Act, 1940. In view of certain disputes, two Arbitrators and an Umpire were appointed. The Arbitrators informed the Umpire that they were unable to agree on the matters raised and consequently the Umpire entered into the arbitration and proceeded to declare his non-speaking award and passed the interim award. The respondent requested the Umpire to authorise one D.C.Singhania to file the award in the appropriate court in India. Such authorisation was granted and the award rendered by the Umpire was lodged in the Bombay High Court. Subsequently, the Umpire rendered a supplementary award as the final award. The same also was lodged in the High Court of Bombay by the Umpire at the instance of the respondent. The respondent lodged a plaint in the US District Court seeking an order of confirmation of the awards and a judgment for payment of interest until the date of the judgment and costs by ONGC. The appellant-ONGC filed a petition under Sections 30 and 33 of the Indian Arbitration Act, 1940 for setting aside the awards rendered by the Umpire and prayed for an interim injunction restraining the respondent from proceeding further with the action instituted in the US court. The Bombay High Court originally granted an ex parte interim injunction but subsequently vacated the same after hearing the parties. Aggrieved against the same, the ONGC approached the Apex Court and the Apex Court while dealing with the said case, has held as follows:"18. In the result we are of the opinion that the facts of this case are eminently suitable for granting a restraint order as prayed for by ONGC. It is no doubt true that this Court sparingly exercises the jurisdiction to restrain a party from proceeding further with an action in a foreign court. We have the utmost respect for the American court. The question however is whether on the facts and circumstances of this case it would not be unjust and unreasonable not to restrain the Western Company from proceeding further with the action in the American court in the facts and circumstances outlined earlier. We would be extremely slow to grant such a restraint order but in the facts and circumstances of this matter we are convinced that this is one of those rare cases where we would be failing in our duty if we hesitate in granting the restraint order, for, to oblige the ONGC to face the aforesaid proceedings in the American court would be oppressive in the facts and circumstances discussed earlier. But before we pass an appropriate order in this behalf, we must deal with the plea that the High Court does not have the jurisdiction to grant such a restraint order even if the proceeding in the foreign court is considered to be oppressive. Counsel for the respondent has placed reliance on Cotton Corporation of India v. United Industrial Bank, (1983) 3 SCR 9 62  (1983) 4 SCC 625  (1984) 55 Com Cas 423, in support of this plea. In Cotton Corporation case, the question before the court was whether in the context of Section 41(b) of the Specific Relief Act, the court was justified in granting the injunction. The said provision runs thus:

41. An injunction cannot be granted (b) to restrain any person from instituting or prosecuting any proceeding in a court not subordinate to that from which the injunction is sought; (emphasis added) This provision, in our opinion, will be attracted only in a factsituation where an injunction is sought to restrain a party from instituting or prosecuting any action in a court in India which is either of co-ordinance jurisdiction or is higher to the court from which the injunction is sought in the hierarchy of courts in India. There is nothing in Cotton Corporation case which supports the proposition that the High Court has no jurisdiction to grant an injunction or a restraint order in exercise of its inherent powers in a situation like the one in the present case. In fact this Court had granted such a restraint order in V/O Tractoroexport, Moscow v. M/s.Tarapore & Company, (1970) 3 SCR 53 : (1969) 3 SCC 562 : AIR 1971 SC 1, and had restrained a party from proceeding with an arbitration proceedings in a foreign country (in Moscow).
As we have pointed out earlier, it would be unfair to refuse the restraint order in a case like the present one for the action in the foreign court would be oppressive in the facts and circumstances of the case. And in such a situation the courts have undoubted jurisdiction to grant such a restraint order whenever the circumstances of the case make it necessary or expedient to do so or the ends of justice so require. The following passage extracted from paragraph 1039 of Halsbury's Laws of England, Vol.24 at page 579 supports this point of view: With regard to foreign proceedings, the court will restrain a person within its jurisdiction from instituting or prosecuting proceedings in a foreign court whenever the circumstances of the case make such an interposition necessary or expedient. In a proper case the court in this country may restrain a person who has actually recovered judgment in a foreign court from proceeding to enforce that judgment. The jurisdiction is discretionary and the court will give credit to foreign courts for doing justice in their own jurisdiction. It was because this position was fully realized that it was argued on behalf of the respondent that the action in the US court could not be considered as being oppressive to the ONGC. We have already dealt with this aspect and reached a conclusion adverse to Western Company. There is no merit in the submission that the High Court of Bombay has no jurisdiction in this behalf."

In the above said decision, the Apex Court has come to the conclusion that the order of injunction should be granted restraining the respondent from proceeding with in US court, on the ground that the Indian court had exclusive jurisdiction to grant such injunction and action taken by the respondent in the foreign court would be oppressive in the facts and circumstances of that case. The American court had no jurisdiction in the facts and circumstances of the case. Moreover, the action by the respondent before American court is in violation of the arbitration clause. Even in Modi's case (supra), the Apex Court had referred to ONGC's case and accepted the principles laid down in ONGC's case and discussed the reason for the c onclusion of the Apex Court in favour of granting injunction. So, the principles laid down even in ONGC's case cannot lend any help to the appellant-company to substantiate their stand for getting injunction in the present case.

43. Even in SNI A'erospatiale v. Lee Kui Jak and another, 1987 All England Reports Volume 3, similar view has been taken and the said decision has also been referred to and discussed in Modi's case. The Privy Council in the said case had also laid down the principles to be applied by the court while granting injunction restraining foreign proceedings. In the said case, there was no jurisdiction agreement for resolution of disputes. In para 17 of the judgment in Modi's case the Apex Court has dealt with the said judgment and so the facts of that case and the principles laid down therein supports the reasoning given by the CLB to reject the injunction as sought for by the appellant.

44. In the decision in CSR LTD. v. Cigna Insurance Australia Ltd., (1997) 146 ALR 402,(HC) it is held that the inherent power to grant anti-suit injunction is to be exercised when the administration of justice so demands or, in the context of anti-suit injunctions, when necessary for protection of courts' own proceedings or processes and with respect to the same subject matter filed in this country and apart from that, a court may, in exercise of the power deriving from the Chancery Court, make orders in restraint of unconscionable conduct or the unconscientious exercise of legal rights. If the bringing of legal proceedings involves unconscionable conduct or the unconscientious exercise of a legal right, an injunction may be granted by a court in the exercise of its equitable jurisdiction in restraint of those proceedings. The said decision also has been referred to and dealt with by the Apex Court in Modi's case. If the facts of the present case are applied to the principles laid down in that case, the CLB is correct in holding that there is no necessity for protection of its own proceeding or process as it has no jurisdiction to deal with the issue raised before the ICC Arbitral Tribunal. Learned Senior Counsel appearing for the appellant relying on the relevant prayers regarding arbitration proceedings in the Company Petition submitted that when the CLB was asked to decide about the necessity to invoke the arbitration clause, namely, 16.2 of the PPA, the present action by the respondents is nothing but oppressive and the same issue is pending before the CLB. But the prayer sought for before the CLB is only to direct the Administrator to invoke clause 16 .2 of PPA which means the Company has to initiate arbitration proceedings. But the proceeding taken by respondents 1 and 2 before the ICC Arbitral Tribunal is as a derivative action as minority shareholders. So, even if any order is passed, as suggested by the learned Senior Counsel appearing for the appellant, in the Company Petition, it does not affect the present proceedings taken by the respondents.

45. In the decision in Laker Airways Limited v. Sabena, Belgian World Airlines, 1984 U.S. App. LEXIS 24811, the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, while dealing with the limits of Federal Court's power to conserve its adjudicatory authority over a case filed with the court, instead of actively raising all defensive claims in the Federal court, the named defendants initiated suits in foreign tribunals for the sole purpose of terminating the federal court's adjudication of the litigation. It is also found that the issue raised in two different courts represents a head-on collision between the diametrically opposed antitrust policies of the United States and United Kingdom. While analysing the said situation, it is held as follows:-

"It is well settled that English and American courts have power to control the conduct of persons subject to their jurisdiction to the extent of forbidding them from suing in foreign jurisdictions. However, the fundamental corollary to concurrent jurisdiction must ordinarily be respected: Parallel proceedings on the same in personam claim should ordinarily be allowed to proceed simultaneously, at least until a judgment is reached in one which can be pled as res judicata in the other. The mere filing of a suit in one forum does not cut off the preexisting right of an independent forum to regulate matters subject to its prescriptive jurisdiction. For this reason, injunctions restraining litigants from proceeding in courts of independent countries are rarely issued. .. .. .. A second reason cautioning against exercise of the power is avoiding the impedance of the foreign jurisdiction. Injunctions operate only on the parties within the personal jurisdiction of the courts.
However, they effectively restrict the foreign courts ability to exercise its jurisdiction. If the foreign court reacts with a similar injunction, no party may be able to obtain any remedy. Thus, only in the most compelling circumstances does a court have discretion to issue an anti-suit injunction. There are no precise rules governing the appropriateness of antisuit injunctions. The equitable circumstances surrounding each request for an injunction must be carefully examined to determine whether, in light of the principles outlined above, the injunction is required to prevent an irreparable miscarriage of justice. Injunctions are most often necessary to protect the jurisdiction of the enjoining court, or to prevent the litigant's evasion of the important public policies of the forum."
The above said decision was referred to by the United States Court of Appeal for the First Circuit in Hans A. Quaak Et AL, v. Klynveld Peat Marwick Goerdeler Bedri Jfsrevisoren, 2004 US App.LEXIS 4352. In the said decision, two basic views, namely, liberal approach and the conservative approach in granting anti-suit injunction with reference to International proceedings have been discussed. While doing so, it is observed as follows:-

"We reject the liberal approach. We deem international comity an important integer in the decisional calculus  and the liberal approach assigns too low a priority to that interest. In the bargain, it undermines the age-old presumption in favor of concurrent parallel proceedings  a value judgment that leaves us uneasy  and presumes that pubic policy always favors allowing a suit pending in an American court to go forward without any substantial impediment. To cinch matters, this approach gives far too easy passage to international antisuit injunctions. We understand that the judicial process is a cornerstone of the American way of life  but in an area that raises significant separation of powers concerns and implicates international relations. We believe that the law calls for a more ca utious and measured approach. The conservative approach has more to commend it. First, it recognizes the rebuttable presumption against issuing international antisuit injunctions (and, thus, honors the presumption favoring the maintenance of parallel proceedings). Second, it is more respectful of principles of international comity. Third, it compels an inquiring court to balance competing policy considerations. Last  but far from least  it fits snugly with the logic of Canadian Filters, in which we said that issuing an international antisuit injunction is a step that should "be taken only with care and great restraint" and with the recognition that international comity is a fundamental principle deserving of substantial defence. .. .. .. In order to provide guidance for the district courts, we spell out the manner in which our preferred approach operates. The gatekeeping inquiry is, of course, whether parallel suits involve the same parties and issues. Unless that condition is met, a court ordinarily should go no further and refuse the issuance of an international antisuit injunction. See e.g., China Trade, 837 F.2d at 36, Laker Airways, 731 F.2d at 928; see also George A. Bermann. The Use of Anti-Suit Injunctions in International Litigation, 28 Colum, J. Transnat'l L. 589 , 626 (1990) (stating that courts generally "will not consider issuing anti-suit injunctions" unless there are "parallel local and foreign actions between the same parties over the same claim"). If  and only if  this threshold condition is satisfied should the court proceed to consider all the facts and circumstances in order to decide whether an injunction is proper. In this analysis, considerations of international comity must be given substantial weight  and those considerations ordinarily establish a rebuttable presumption against the issuance of an order that has the effect of halting foreign judicial proceedings."
46. Learned Senior Counsel appearing for the appellant submitted that the appellant-company can sustain their petition for injunction even without filing a counter claim. In support of his submission, learned Senior Counsel relied on the decision of the learned single Judge of the Karnataka High Court reported in Suganda Bai v. Sulu Bai, AIR 1975 Knt., 137, in which it is held as follows:-

"3. Now the principles, under which a defendant may seek and obtain an order of temporary injunction against the plaintiff, are stated in Collison v. Warren, (1901) 1Ch 812 where Buckley, J., after referring to a number of earlier decisions of the English Courts, quoted Lopes, LJ, in (1824) 2 Ch 541 at p. 545: "The question is this  whether the defendant can move for an injunction against the plaintiff without filing a counter-claim or issuing a writ in a cross-action. In my opinion, he can in some cases, but only in cases where the defendant's claim to relief arises out of the plaintiff's cause of action, or is incidental to it." Buckley, J., also referred to the decision of Davey, L.J., in the same case wherein it is stated thus: "In my opinion, it must be relating to or arising out of the relief sought in the action which is before the Court, and that any other injunction cannot properly be granted in the action." The principles stated in the above decision have been followed by this Court and it is only in cases where the defendants' claim to relief arises out of the plaintiff's cause of action or is incidental to it that he can ask for a temporary injunction against the plaintiff. 4. In the instant case, the cause of action for the plaintiff's suit, as stated earlier arose in the year 1970, whereas the cause of action for the defendants arose in the year 1973. The two causes of action are different. Therefore, the courts below were wholly in error in granting temporary injunction prayed for by defendant
1."
47. Learned Senior Counsel appearing for the appellant also relied on the decision in Ramaiah & others v. Godappa & others, 1989 (1) Kar.L.J. 210, to substantiate the same contention as stated above. The decision in AIR 1975 Knt. 137 (supra) in the earlier paragraph has been referred to and the Division Bench in the decision in 1989 (1) Kar. L.J. 210 (supra) has agreed with the view of the learned single Judge rendered in AIR 1975 Knt. 137 (supra).

48. In the present case, the appellant's claim before the CLB is not on the basis of cause of action arose in the Company Petition or incidental to it. As discussed above, the prayer in the Company Petition is on the basis of mismanagement. Incidentally respondents 1 and 2 have sought for direction to the administrator to invoke the arbitration clause available in the PPA. But the appellant now seeks an order of injunction to stall the proceedings taken on different capacity which is nothing to do with the prayer sought for in the main Company Petition and so the said decisions cannot be relied on to support the appellant's case in this appeal.

49. Now we have to consider the issue raised here on the basis of the principles laid down in various decisions as to whether the CLB erred in not granting anti-suit injunction as prayed for by the appellant-company, restraining the respondents 1 and 2 from proceeding with the arbitration proceedings initiated by them before the ICC Arbitral Tribunal.

50. Though the relief of injunction as sought for against respondents 1 and 2 is amenable to personal jurisdiction of the CLB, on that basis only it cannot be said that the CLB is not correct in rejecting the petition seeking for anti-suit injunction. Since respondents 1 and 2 initiated arbitration proceedings only in the interest of the Company to recover the dues from the TNEB and also as contemplated in the PPA entered into between the appellant-company and the TNEB and not for personal interest or gain of respondents 1 and 2, it cannot be said that ends of justice would be defeated by not granting injunction as sought for. But, if injunction is granted, injustice would be perpetuated as the appellant-company has sought for injunction against respondents 1 and 2 from proceeding with arbitration proceedings even by taking derivative action as minority shareholders permanently, it amounts preventing respondents 1 and 2 from exercising their common law right which is available to them. Moreover, the appropriate forum to invoke arbitration proceedings under clause 16.2 of the PPA is the ICC Arbitral Tribunal in view of the specific contract between the appellant-company and TNEB and no such proceeding can be taken in India as it has been specifically excluded. To appreciate the above reasons, it is relevant to extract clause 16.2 of the PPA which reads as follows:-

"16.2 Arbitration of Disputes: In the event the Parties are unable to resolve any dispute pursuant to Section 16.1, then; (a) Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, any dispute, controversy, or claim arising out of or relating to this Agreement, or breach, termination or validity thereof, shall be finally settled by arbitration in accordance with this Section 16.2
(b) Notwithstanding Section 17.8 the arbitration shall be conducted in accordance with the Rules of Conciliation and Arbitration of the International Chamber of Commerce (the "ICC") in effect on the date of this Agreement (the "Rules") (c) There shall be three arbitrators of whom each Party shall select one. The two arbitrators thus appointed shall select the third arbitrator to act as chairman of the tribunal within thirty (30) days of selection of the second arbitrator. If the two Party-appointed arbitrators fails to agree on a third arbitrator, the ICC Court of Arbitration shall make such appointment. (d) At any oral hearing of evidence in connection with the arbitration, each Party thereto or its legal counsel shall have the right to examine its witnesses and to cross-examine the witness of an opposing Party. No evidence of any witness shall be presented in written form unless the opposing Party or Parties shall have the opportunity to cross-examine such witness, except as the Parties to the dispute otherwise agree in writing or except under extraordinary circumstances where the interest of justice require a different procedure. (e) The arbitration shall be held in London, England.
Notwithstanding Section 17.8 the laws of England shall govern the validity, interpretation, construction, performance and enforcement of the provisions contained in this Section 16.2. The arbitration proceedings shall be conducted, and the award shall be rendered, in the English language. (f) This Agreement and the rights and obligation of the Parties shall remain in full force and effect pending the award in any arbitration proceedings hereunder. (g) The costs of arbitration shall be determined by the arbitral tribunal in accordance with the Rules. (h) The Indian Arbitration Act (Act No.X (10) of 1940: The Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996, shall not be applicable to this arbitration provision, to any arbitration proceeding or award rendered hereunder, or to any dispute or difference arising out of or in relation to this Agreement. Any award rendered hereunder shall be a " foreign award" within the meaning of the Indian Foreign Awards Act, 1961. (i) The Parties hereby waive any rights of application or appeal to the courts of India to the fullest extent permitted by law in connection with any question of law arising in the course of arbitration or with respect to any award made." Since respondents 1 and 2 had approached only the ICC Arbitral Tribunal which is the forum of parties choice in which the exclusive jurisdiction is created, the proceedings before the ICC Arbitral Tribunal cannot per se be treated as vexatious or oppressive, nor the ICC Arbitral Tribunal be said to be the forum non-conveniens and in view of the above said clause 16.2 of the PPA, CLB cannot decide the said issue which has been raised before the ICC Arbitral Tribunal and so the CLB is not having jurisdiction to decide the said issue. In view of the fact that the ICC Arbitral Tribunal is having natural and exclusive jurisdiction and a forum of choice of the parties, no anti-suit injunction can be granted in respect of proceedings taken before the natural and exclusive jurisdiction of the forum of choice of parties by the forum, namely, the CLB, which is no t having jurisdiction to decide the issue raised before the ICC Arbitral Tribunal especially when the CLB is not even having concurrent jurisdiction to decide that issue in question. If injunction as sought for is granted, it amounts to aiding breach of contract, namely, clause 16.2 of the PPA, as the proceedings have been taken before the ICC Arbitral Tribunal which is having natural and exclusive jurisdiction for which the parties have specifically consented and the CLB which is not having natural jurisdiction with respect to the issue raised before the ICC Arbitral Tribunal. When the CLB is not having jurisdiction to decide the issue raised before the ICC Arbitral Tribunal, the question of protecting the CLB's own proceeding and process does not arise. On the basis of the facts set out earlier, it is clear that there is no duplication of parties and issues both before the CLB and before the ICC Arbitral Tribunal. As rightly found by the CLB, TNEB is not a party before the CLB, but it is a party before the ICC arbitral tribunal. Moreover, TNEB cannot be a party before the CLB, as no relief can be granted by the CLB against the TNEB. Furthermore, the courts have taken the views that the arbitration proceedings should not be stopped from proceeding further, but, on the other hand, the said proceedings should be completed at an early date. So, seeking an anti-suit injunction by the appellant-company is contrary to the settled principles of law. In view of the reasons given, there cannot be any irreparable or miscarriage of justice if injunction is granted. As respondents 1 and 2 have proceeded with the arbitration proceedings only for the benefit of the Company and consequently of the shareholders, by taking steps to recover huge amount from the TNEB, they are not asking any personal benefit out of the same. Respondents 1 and 2 have taken steps, which would have been taken by the Company. In the present case, it cannot be said that there is a multiplicity of proceedings both efore the CLB and ICC Arbitral Tribunal as the scope of the proceedings before them are different and each proceeding was taken with the respective forum which is having exclusive jurisdiction on the subject raised before it. Moreover, the appellant-company has not come forward with necessary pleadings to grant anti-suit injunction by the CLB, which are required to establish the necessary facts to grant such order. In view of the above, it cannot be said that the CLB has committed error in not granting injunction as prayed for by the appellant-company. The CLB had rightly exercised its discretion in not exercising its inherent power in favour of the appellant-company and travelled on the carpet provided for it and so no interference is warranted by this Court.

51. Point No.2:- Though this issue is not very much relevant in view of the findings given earlier regarding jurisdiction of the CLB, we are inclined to deal with the same as the same has been argued elaborately. A shareholders agreement was entered into on 24th November 19 98 among respondents 1 to 4, and the appellant-company. Clause 14.3 of the said agreement which is put against respondents 1 and 2 reads as follows:-

"14.3. It is understood that the Parties are independent entities engaged in the conduct of their own business. Except as expressly provided for herein, this Agreement shall not constitute any Party as the legal representative or agent of any other party for any purpose whatsoever, and no Party shall have the right or authority to assume, create, or incur any liability or obligation of any kind, express or implied, in the name of or on behalf of any other Party. If any party provides services or supplies products or technology to the Company or to the any Party, such Party does so as an independent contractor engaged in its own business."
The above said clause prohibits any party to act as a legal representative or agent or any other party for any purpose whatsoever and no party shall have the right to assume, create or incur any liability or obligation of any kind express or implied in the name of or on behalf of any other party. This clause is relied upon by the appellant-company to say that respondents 1 and 2 have no authority or they are prohibited to take arbitration proceedings in the name of the appellant-company. The CLB rightly rejected the case of the appellantcompany on the ground that the said clause cannot override the established common law right of the minority shareholders to take derivative action. Moreover, the issue regarding maintainability of request for arbitration at the instance of respondents 1 and 2 is pending before the ICC Arbitral Tribunal and so we are not inclined to deal with the issue on the basis of clause 14.3 of the shareholders agreement in detail in this appeal, as the CLB is not going to decide the same in the Company Petition filed by respondents 1 and 2 and they have proceeded with the arbitration proceedings not on the basis of a right arises under an agreement.

52. Learned Senior Counsel appearing for the appellant submitted that having sought for similar relief in the Company Petition and having failed in their attempt in getting interim orders to permit them to proceed with the arbitration proceedings, the Tribunal should have granted anti suit injunction as prayed for by the appellant-company, as the respondents 1 and 2 have taken the arbitration proceedings in spite of the orders rejecting their request for the same. On the contrary, Dr.Singhvi, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the respondents 1 and 2 submitted that the relief sought for in the Company Petition and the relief sought for by way of interim relief and also in C.A.No.38/2004 are only to direct the Administrator/directors to initiate arbitration proceedings. The proceedings now taken by the ICC Arbitral Tribunal is only a derivative action by minority shareholders applying the exception to the principles laid down in Foss v. Harbottle (1843) 2 Hare 461 : (67 E R 189), and so it cannot be said that the orders of the CLB either stand in the way of the respondents 1 and 2 or prohibit to take such proceedings, especially when no positive direction is given not to proceed with the arbitration proceedings.

53. Respondents 1 and 2 are minority shareholders in the appellantcompany having 46% of shares. The TNEB owes money to the appellantcompany towards supply of power generated by the appellant-company. It is not in dispute that the TNEB has not provided the multi-layered payment security mechanism as mentioned in the PPA. Respondents 1 and 2 filed C.P.No.8/2004 before the CLB, Additional Principal Bench, Chennai, under Section 398 read with Sections 402, 403 and 235 of the Companies Act, 1956. It is no doubt true that in the said Company Petition, respondents 1 and 2 have come forward with the pleadings regarding non-compliance of the clauses mentioned in the PPA regarding the payment security mechanism by the TNEB and also the outstanding of a sum of Rs.468.88 crores (approximate) as on 31.1.2004. It is relevant to mention here that before filing the said Company Petition, the 1st respondent-company moved the Board for passing resolution to take action to recover money. Since they failed in their attempt, they approached the CLB. Apart from the above said fact, various averments regarding mismanagement have been averred in the Company Petition. On that basis, they have sought for appointment of an administrator for the appellant-company and also to vest with the powers to the said administrator to initiate and continue the proceedings against the TNEB for and on behalf of the Company with respect to the Company's right under the PPA. Even while seeking for interim order, respondents 1 and 2 have prayed only to give direction to the administrator to invoke alternative dispute resolution mechanism. No doubt, in the order dated 9.3.2004, the CLB rejected such request for interim relief as sought for. Even in C.A.38/2004, respondents 1 and 2 prayed before the CLB to authorise the directors of the Company who are the nominee directors of respondents 1 and 2, to represent the company to initiate, institute and prosecute the alternate dispute resolution mechanism under the PPA on behalf of the Company against the TNEB. From the above said facts, it is clear that by taking the said proceedings, respondents 1 and 2 tried to get direction from the CLB to invoke alternative dispute resolution mechanism either by the administrator or by the directors of the Company though such directors are nominee directors of respondents 1 and 2. The administrator, if appointed, would amount to replacing the Board and so the above said prayers and orders passed by the CLB cannot be construed as if respondents 1 and 2 have come forward with the plea that they should be permitted to invok e alternative dispute resolution mechanism and so the action of respondents 1 and 2 in initiating such proceedings cannot be allowed to proceed further. The action that was sought to be taken against the TNEB is a right conferred under clause 16.2 of the PPA. Respondents 1 and 2 have approached the CLB for the above said reliefs and they have not sought for the relief to proceed with the alternate dispute resolution mechanism by themselves as minority share holders. The proceedings in question taken by respondents 1 and 2 invoking arbitration clause under the PPA before the ICC Arbitral Tribunal is on different capacity and on their own right. The proceedings pending before the CLB is not for recovering money from the TNEB itself. So merely because on the basis of the same facts respondents 1 and 2 have taken proceedings before the ICC Arbitral Tribunal, it cannot be said that the orders passed by the CLB would prevent respondents 1 and 2 from exercising their independent right as minority shareholders. We are not going into the question whether they can sustain the petition before the ICC Arbitral Tribunal as minority shareholders, as, such an issue has already been framed and it has to be gone into and decided by the ICC Arbitral Tribunal.

54. Respondents 1 and 2 are having two kinds of rights to get redress. With respect to breach of any clause in the PPA, as minority shareholders of the Company, they can approach the Company to proceed against the TNEB, for the breach. If it is not acceded to by the Company, then as minority shareholders, they can invoke their right in that capacity to get the relief for the benefit of the Company by way of derivative action. As rightly submitted by Dr.Singhvi, learned Senior Counsel appearing for respondents 1 and 2, only if the request made by respondents 1 and 2 to the Company to proceed against the TNEB is rejected, respondents 1 and 2 can invoke their right as minority shareholders.

55. So, the orders passed by the CLB rejecting the request of respondents 1 and 2 to direct the Company to initiate proceedings against the TNEB either through administrator or through directors cannot stand in the way of respondents 1 and 2 to take derivative action to safeguard their interest as minority shareholders. Even in the request for arbitration filed before the ICC arbitral tribunal, the copy of which is produced before us, it is stated that such a proceeding has been taken to protect the interest of the Company by the minority shareholders. Even in the petition filed in C.A.No.62/2004, in para 8, it is admitted that such action by the appellant-company was by way of derivative action. Learned Senior Counsel appearing for the appellant tried to impress upon this Court that a party who was not able to get permission from the CLB cannot be permitted to proceed with the same proceedings ignoring the orders passed by the CLB. If such a party, in this case, respondents 1 and 2, is given right to invoke such arbitration proceedings on different capacity and exercising different right, it cannot be said that the proceedings before the CLB seeking relief differently, cannot be put against respondents 1 and 2 as if they have ignored the orders of the CLB and proceeded with the proceedings before the ICC Arbitral Tribunal invoking arbitration clause under the PPA.

56. We are not now dealing with the maintainability of the request for arbitration in the name of the Company and not in the name of minority shareholders, as the said issue is pending before the ICC arbitral tribunal at the instance of the TNEB. It is also relevant to mention here that the TNEB has not raised any objection for arbitration. As a matter of fact, they have appointed their arbitrator and no proceedings before the CLB or Court are taken by the TNEB, questioning the invoking of arbitration proceedings by respondents 1 and 2.

57. In view of the above, we are of the considered view that there is no bar for respondents 1 and 2 to take proceedings to invoke the arbitration clause as minority shareholders by way of derivative action.

58. Against the order passed by the CLB, it is informed that respondents 1 and 2 have preferred appeal before this Court, but it was not prosecuted. Even then, in view of the above said discussion, the said fact cannot have so much importance. 59. The Rule in Foss v. Harbottle (1943 (2) Hare 461 67 E R 189) is to the effect that the Court will not interfere with the ordinary management of a Company acting within its powers and has no jurisdiction to do so at the instance of the shareholders. A shareholder is entitled to institute a suit to enforce his individual rights against the Company such as his right to vote, or his right to stand as a director of a Company at an election. If the shareholder however intends to obtain redress in respect of a wrong done to the Company or to recover monies as damages alleged to be due to the Company, the action should ordinarily be brought by the Company itself. So to enable a shareholder to institute a suit in the name of the Company in such a case, there must be the sanction of the majority for corporate action. This principle implies supremacy of the will of the majority. If the majority acts in an oppressive manner, it is not as if the minority are without a remedy. In the above said Foss v. Harbottle's case at p.482,, Sir James Wigram, Vice-chancellor who delivered the judgment, observed as follows:-

"If a case should arise of injury to a corpn., by some of its members, for which no adequate remedy remained, except that of a suit by individual corporators in their private characters, & asking in such character the protection of those rights to which in their corporate character they were entitled, I cannot bu t think that the principle so forcibly laid down by Lord Cottenham in 'Wallworth v. Holt' (1841) 4 Myl & Cr.619: (41 E R 238) & other cases would apply, & the claims of justice would be found superior to any difficulties arising out of technical rules respecting the mode in which corpns., are required to sue."
Subsequently, various decisions have recognised exceptions to what is conveniently known as the rule of Foss v. Harbottle (supra). The Division Bench of this Court in the decision in Nagappa v. Madras Race Club, AIR 1951 Madras 831, held as follows:-

"(9) The later decisions however have recognised exceptions to what is conveniently known as the rule in 'Foss v. Harbottle', (1843) 2 Hare 461 :
(67 E R 189). James L.J., in 'Mac Dougall v. Gardiner', (18 75) 1 Ch.D.13 : (45 L J Ch 27) considered the rule & stated the exceptions in the following passages at p.21 which has since become classic:
"I think it is of the utmost importance in all these companies that the rule which is well known in this Ct., as the rules in 'Mozley v. Alston', (1847) 1 Ph 790: (61 L J Ch 217) ; & 'Lord v. Copper Miners' Co.', (1898) 2 Ph 740 : (2 De G & S 308) & ss v. Harbottle', (184 3) 2 Hare 461 : (67 E R
189) should be always adhered to; that is to say, that nothing connected with internal disputes between the share-holders is to be made the subject of a bill by some one share-holder on behalf of himself & others, unless there be something illegal, oppressive, or fraudulent  unless there is something 'ultra vires' on the part of the Co., 'qua Co.' or on the part of the majority of the Co., so that they are not fit persons to determine it; but that every litigation must be in the name of the Co., if the Co., really desire it."
From this it follows that a share-holder or share-holders are entitled to bring an action (1) in respect of matters which are 'ultra vires' the Co., & which the majority of share-holders were incapable of sanctioning; (see 'Burland v. Earle', 1902 A C 83 : (71 L J P C 1); (2) where the act complained of constitutes a fraud on the minority, & (3) where the action of the majority is illegal. The decisions in ' Baillie v. Oriental Telephone & Electric Co. Ltd.', 1915-1 Ch 503 : (8 4 L J Ch 409) & 'Cotter v. National Union of Seamen', 1929-2 Ch 58 : (98 L J Ch 323) recognised a fourth exception where a special resolution was required by the Articles of the Co. & Co., obtained the assent of the majority to such special resolution by a trick, or even where a Co., authorised to do a particular thing only by a special resolution, does it without a special resolution duly passed as in such a case to deny a right of suit to the share-holders without using the name of the Co., would in effect result, the Co., doing the thing by an ordinary resolution. ...."

Though the learned Senior Counsel appearing for the appellant submitted that the request for arbitration was not filed on behalf of the minority shareholders and it is only by the appellant-company and so respondents 1 and 2 cannot maintain such a petition, as stated already, the maintainability of such petition at the instance of respondents 1 and 2 need not be gone into, as the very question is raised before the ICC Arbitral Tribunal and pending. But the fact remains, the proceedings were taken by way of derivative action by minority shareholders, namely, respondents 1 and 2, which is permissible in law, though we are not going into the correctness of the form in which such a request for arbitration was made. 59. The Learned Senior Counsel appearing for the appellant-company relied on the principle of Res judicata in support of his submission that the proceedings taken by respondents 1 and 2 before the ICC Arbitral Tribunal cannot be allowed to proceed with. The principles of resjudi cata is based on the need of giving a finality to the judicial decisions. What it says that once a resjudi cata is judicata, it shall not be adjudged again. This principle of resjudi cata is embodied in relation to suits under Sec.11 of the Code. But, even where Sec.11 of the Code does not apply, the principles of resjudi cata has been applied by Courts for the purpose of achieving finality in litigation.

60. To rely upon the principles of resjudi cata, the following conditions should exist: (a) The matter directly and substantially in issue in the subsequent proceedings must be directly and substantially in issue in the former proceedings; (b) The former proceeding must be between the same parties or between the parties under whom they or any of them claim; (c) Such a party must be litigating under the same title in the former proceeding; (d) If the Court which dealt with the earlier proceeding is not competent to decide the subsequent proceedings for want of pecuniary jurisdiction till it cannot be a ground for holding that the decision of the former Court is not res judicata; (e) Such a matter in issue in the subsequent proceeding must have been heard and finally decided in the earlier proceeding. Unless the above conditions are satisfied, it cannot be said that the subsequent proceedings taken by the respondents 1 and 2 do constitute res judicata. In the present case, as rightly submitted by the learned Senior Counsel appearing for the respondents 1 and 2, there is no specific plea regarding res judicata and the CLB cannot deal with the issue raised before the ICC Arbitral Tribunal, and the TNEB is also not a party before it. Moreover, even according to clause 16.2 of the PPA, only the ICC Arbitral Tribunal alone can deal with the arbitration and Indian Courts have been specifically excluded the jurisdiction. Such a clause of exclusive jurisdiction with the ICC Arbitral Tribunal with reference to arbitration was agreed upon between the appellant and the TNEB.

61. The maxim "no man should be vexed twice over the same cause" ( memo debt Bis Vexari Prouna Et Eadem Causa) is recognised to be a principle of law which has to be given effect to and followed without being undully restricted by the terms of the statute as enacted in Sec.11 of the CPC. The plea of of res judicata will apply only to the orders of the court or forum having concurrent jurisdiction to stay the subsequent proceedings, if the order or judgment of the court of exclusive jurisdiction was directly on the p oint, and the same matter between the parties. It is conclusive upon the same or between the same parties if the issue goes before another court even for a different purpose.

62. In the decision in Satyadhyan V. Smt.Deorajin Debi, AIR 1960 S. C. 941, the Apex Court has dealt with the principle of Res judicata, as follows:-

"(7) The principle of res judicata is base on the need of giving a finality to judicial decisions. What it says is that once a res is judicata, it shall not be adjudged again. Primarily it applies as between past litigation and furture litigation. When a matter - whether on a question of fact or a question of law  has been decided between two parties in one suit or proceeding and the decision is final, either because no appeal was taken to a higher court or because the appeal was dismissed, or no appeal lies, neither party will be allowed in a future suit or proceeding between the same parties to canvass the matter again. This principle of res judicata is embodied in relation to suits in S.11 of the Code of Civil Procedure; but even where S.1 1 does not apply, the principle of res judicata has been applied by courts for the purpose of achieving finality in litigation. The result of this is that the original court as well as any higher court must in any future litigation proceed on the basis that the previous decision was correct.
(8) The principle of res judicata applies also as between two stages in the same litigation to this extent that a court, whether the trial court or a higher court having at an earlier stage decided a matter in one way will not allow the parties to re-agitate the matter again at a subsequent stage of the same proceedings. Does this however mean that because at an earlier stage of the litigation a court has decided an interlocutory matter in one way and no appeal has been taken therefrom or no appeal did lie, a higher court cannot at a later stage of the same litigation consider the matter again?"
63. Even in the decision in Dhanwanti Joshi v. Madhan Unde, (1998) 1 SCC 112, the Apex Court had applied the principles of Res judicata to the interlocutory orders and held as follows:-

"21. It is no doubt true that orders relating to custody of children are by their very nature not final, but are interlocutory in nature and subject to modification at any future time upon proof of change of circumstances requiring change of custody but such change in custody must be proved to be in the paramount interests of the child (Rosy Jacob v. Jacob A.Chakramakkal, (1973) 1 SCC 840). However, we may state that in respect of orders as to custody already passed in favour of the appellant the doctrine of res judicata applies and the Family Court in the present proceedings cannot re-examine the facts which were formerly adjudicated between the parties on the issue of custody or are deemed to have been adjudicated. There must be proof of substantial change in the circumstances presenting a new case before the court. It must be established that the previous arrangement was not conducive to the child's welfare or that it has produced unsatisfactory results. Ormerod, L.J., pointed out in S v.W, (1981) 11 Fam Law 81 (Fam Law at p.82 (CA) that "the status quo argument depends for its strength wholly and entirely on whether the status quo is satisfactory or not. The more satisfactory the status quo, the stronger the argument for not interfering. The less satisfactory the status quo, the less one requires before deciding to change."."
64. The respondents 1 and 2 have not sought for any relief similar to the relief sought for before the ICC Arbitral Tribunal. To take derivative action by minority shareholders, no permission from CLB is necessary as the said action is distinct and separate from the proceeding pending before the CLB. The respondents 1 and 2 have come forward with the prayer seeking a direction to appoint administrator for the purpose of invoking clause 16.2 of the PPA or to permit the directors mentioned in the petition to invoke clause 16.2 of the PPA. They have not sought for, before the CLB, to appoint arbitrator, which can be done only as per clause 16.2 of the PPA. All these steps are being taken by respondents 1 and 2 only to safeguard the interest of the appellant-company and according to respondents 1 and 2, if the proceedings are not initiated in time, it would become time-barred. Though there is a dispute regarding the period of limitation, we need not decide the said issue in this appeal. From the above, it is clear that the appellants have not satisfied any one of the conditions mentioned above to sustain their claim that the respondents are estopped from taking proceedings before the ICC Arbitral Tribunal in view of the order passed by the CLB.

65. The learned Senior Counsel appearing for the appellant referred to an example more than once in support of his submission that the respondents 1 and 2 shall not be permitted to proceed with the proceedings pending before the ICC Arbitral Tribunal. According to him, if a petition is filed by a person seeking permission to go to Bombay and if it is refused, he cannot go to Bombay at all. But, we have to see on what capacity he sought for permission. If he sought for permission to go to Bombay in his individual capacity and even if it is refused, it cannot be said that there is a prohibition against him to go to Bombay, if he goes to Bombay on different capacity. So, the said example is not applicable to the facts of the present case.

66. In the present case, two remedies are available to the respondents. (1) Seeking a direction to take arbitration proceedings by the Company (either through administrator or directors) itself as a regular and normal action under the PPA and (2) as minority shareholders. by way of derivative action invoking arbitration clause. In this case, the respondents 1 and 2 have invoked their first right before the CLB and the second right before the ICC Arbitral Tribunal.

67. Moreover, the appellant-company did not file Application in C.A.No.62/2004 on the ground that respondents 1 and 2 have violated the orders of the tribunal and so the injunction should be granted. The appellant-company mentioned the said facts regarding the orders passed by the CLB only as a passing reference.

68. In view of the above, the submission made by the learned Senior Counsel appearing for the appellant on the ground of res judi- cata, we are not inclined to interfere with the order passed by the CLB on that ground.

69. Point No.3:- It is relevant to mention here that the respondents 1 and 2 filed a Company Petition in C.P.No.8/2004 under Section 398 read with Section 402, 403 and 235 of the Companies Act seeking various reliefs as mentioned in the petition. The appellant-company filed C.A.No.62/2004 seeking an order of injunction restraining the respondents 1 and 2 from proceeding with the ICC Case No.13218/MS, pending before the ICC Arbitral Tribunal, Paris and restraining the respondents 1and 2 from initiating any derivative action on behalf of the appellant-company. The said petition, namely, C.A.No.62 of 2004 is filed in C.P.No.8/2004, filed by the respondents 1 and 2. The main reason set out in the application is, even before the main Company Petition in C.P.No.8/2004 is not disposed of, respondents 1and 2 have initiated derivative action against the TNEB, that too in the name of the appellant-company without any appropriate authorisation as per the statutory requirement and so the civil courts can restrain a party from instituting proceedings in foreign jurisdiction when a particular issue is already pending before the Courts of India and the CLB would have the same power as the civil court to grant anti suit injunction where proceedings initiated in a foreign jurisdiction are wholly illegal and cause serious prejudice to the interest of the company. From the above pleadings in C.A.No.62/2004, we can set out the basis on which the said application is filed:-

(1) The minority shareholders/respondents 1 and 2 initiated derivative action against the TNEB, in the name of the appellant-company without any appropriate authorisation as per the statutory requirement;
(2) Civil courts are having jurisdiction to restrain such a party to institute proceedings in foreign jurisdiction;
(3) Such a derivative action cannot be taken when the decision of the Board of Directors was not to initiate proceedings against the TNEB.
(4) Since the proceeding initiated in the foreign jurisdiction are wholly illegal and cause serious prejudice to the interest of the Company, the injunction should be granted;
The above said basis on which the application is filed is only relying on the facts which has been done subsequent to the filing of the Company Petition. The cause of action to file the above C.A.No.62/200 4 arises after the filing of C.P.No.8/2004 and orders passed in the Company Petition and Company Application. Even on this ground, the appellant-company cannot sustain their petition.

70. In C.P.No.8/2004, by way of passing reference, the orders dated 9.3.2004 and 25.3.2004 have been mentioned and the appellant-company has not relied on the said orders heavily to insist before the CLB to grant anti suit injunction. But the appellantcompany has put forth the case mainly on the ground that the Board of Directors have decided to keep cordial relationship with the TNEB, without taking any action regarding arbitration and not to insist the payment security mechanism and so the proceedings initiated by the respondents 1 and 2 are illegal and cause serious prejudice to the interest of the Company. Mainly on that basis, the injunction was sought for. The subject matter in the said application is nothing to do with the main Company Petition. Therefore the appellant-company should have taken separate proceedings if they are entitled in law and they should not have approached the CLB by way of interlocutory application that too in the Company Petition filed by the respondents. Though the learned Senior Counsel appearing for the appellant during the course of arguments has mainly submitted that respondents 1 and 2 have ignored the orders of the CLB, they have approached the CLB for injunction,not on the basis of any such pleading in the Company Application, except to the extent as stated above.

71. Moreover, the nature of prayer sought for in the application in C.A.No.62/2004 is not temporary in nature but it is of permanent nature. Even with respect to clause (b) of the prayers, the same cannot be entertained and if such prayers are granted, it would amount to taking away the valuable right of respondents 1 and 2 as minority shareholders. If such reliefs sought for are given, respondents 1 and 2 would become remediless. So such prayers cannot be construed as interim prayers and such petition in C.P.No.8/2004 before the CLB cannot be sustained.

72. Even with respect to the prejudice of the company if the arbitration is allowed to be proceeded with, Mr.Udaya Holla, the learned Senior Counsel appearing for the appellant submitted that respondents 1 and 2 should not be allowed to proceed with the arbitration proceedings which are detrimental to the interest of the Company. According to him, when the Company is not willing to take arbitration proceedings on the basis of commercial decisions, minority shareholders cannot be allowed to take arbitration proceedings. According to him, even other creditors of the Company are supporting the decision of the Company in this regard. He also submitted that since the TNEB is the sole purchaser of power supply generated by the appellant, if the appellant-company antagonise the TNEB, there is a possibility of refusing to purchase the power from the TNEB and thereby the appellantcompany has to close down the industry. Learned Senior Counsel cited some of the example regarding such action taken by the TNEB in various states. But, as rightly submitted by Dr.Singhvi, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the respondents 1 and 2, in the Application filed in C.A.No.62/2004, it is only stated as follows:-

"The Hon'ble Board would have the same power as civil courts to grant anti-suit injunction where the proceedings in a foreign jurisdiction are wholly illegal and "cause serious prejudice to the interest of the Company" .
Except the said averment, no other pleading is available in the Application as suggested by the learned Senior Counsel appearing for the appellant-company. Even in the grounds filed before this Court, such a plea has not been made. So, such a factual submission made by the learned Senior Counsel appearing for the appellant-company cannot be taken into consideration to decide the issue in question for want of pleadings.
73. We, therefore, find ourselves in agreement with the view taken by the CLB as the appellant-company has not made out a case for anti-suit injunction and so the order of the CLB rejecting the prayer for anti-suit injunction need not be interfered with.

74. For all the reasons stated above, this Appeal is dismissed. But, there shall be no order as to costs. C.M.P.Nos.12274 to 12276 of 2 004 are also dismissed.

Index:yes Internet:yes sks 
================================================================================


================================================================================
CASE 13:
[Cites 16, Cited by 4]
Allahabad High Court
Radha Raman Bajpai And Ors. vs Labour Appellate Tribunal Of India And ... on 22 February, 1956
Equivalent citations: (1957)IILLJ15ALL
JUDGMENT
 

M.C. Desai, J.
 

1. This is an application under Article 226 of the Constitution for writs of certiorari quashing orders of the State industrial tribunal, Uttar Pradesh and the Labour Appellate Tribunal of India, Third Bench, Lucknow, and a writ of mandamus directing the State industrial tribunal to re-hear the reference. The applicants are workmen of the Sun Publishers and, advertisers limited, opposite party 3, which has its registered office at Kanpur. on 10 September 1953, Sri S.P. Mehra, the managing director of opposite party 3, framed charges against some workmen including the applicants to the effect that on 9 September 1953, at 1.30 p.m. they under the leadership of R.K. Tewari, applicant 2, Staged an illegal strike without giving previous notice and at 4 p.m. took forcible possession of the press, and called upon them to submit their explanations on 12 September 1953, by 10.30 a.m. The charges were heard by the managing director of opposite party 3 on 12 September 1953. but none of the applicants appeared before him and none of them submitted any explanation. He recorded evidence of some witnesses in support of the charges and being satisfied from the evidence that the charges were proved dismissed the applicants from service on the same day. The applicants and three other workmen who were dismissed with them moved the conciliation board for conciliation of their dispute with the opposite party on 12 September 1953. On 14 September 1953, the managing director received written explanations of the applicants, but was not persuaded to alter the order of dismissal passed against them. The conciliation proceedings started by the applicants proved abortive and the State Government, Uttar Pradesh through its notification, dated 23 December 1953 referred to the State Industrial Tribunal Uttar Pradesh for adjudication the issues whether the employers have wrongfully and/or unjustifiably dismissed their thirteen workmen, given in the Annexure", and "if so, to what relief are the workmen entitled." The dispute was referred for adjudication in exercise of the powers conferred under Sections 3, 4 and 8 of the Uttar Pradesh Industrial Disputes Act (XXVIII of 1947) and in pursuance of the provisions of Clause 10 of G.O. No. 671, dated 15 March 1951. The thirteen workmen named in the annexure included all the applicants. The tribunal proceeded to adjudicate the issue ; the applicants and opposite party 3 produced evidence before it. Through its order, dated 27 February 1954, it maintained the dismissal of Radha Raman and R.K. Tewari, applicants 1 and 2, on the ground that it was neither wrongful nor unjustifiable, held that Kamla Kant, applicant 7, had not been dismissed at all and upheld the grounds of dismissal of the remaining ten workmen but held that the punishment awarded exceeded the gravity of the offence committed by them and ordered them to be reinstated with immediate effect. It found as a matter of fact that the workmen had staged an illegal strike and that their conduct was unruly. The applicants as well as opposite party 3 appealed from the tribunal to the Labour Appellate Tribunal of India, Third Bench, Lucknow. The Appellate Tribunal on 8 December 1954 dismissed the appeal of the applicants and allowed that of opposite party 3 and restored the dismissal of the remaining ten workmen also.

2. One of the grounds on which the applicants challenged the dismissal before the industrial tribunal was that conciliation proceedings were pending on 12 September 1953, on which date the order of dismissal was passed by opposite party 3, and that opposite party 3 had obtained no permission from the conciliation officer for dismissing them. Admittedly the opposite party did not obtain permission of the conciliation officer for dismissing the workmen, but the allegation that conciliation proceedings were pending on 12 September 1953 was seriously challenged on behalf of the opposite party. The conciliation proceedings were started on an application which does not bear any signature, A witness of the applicants deposed that it was presented before the conciliation officer on 12 September 1953, but the notice issued to the opposite party by the conciliation officer mentioned that the application had been received on 14 September 1953. The industrial tribunal after considering all the evidence concluded that the application for conciliation proceedings was not presented on 12 September 1953 and that no conciliation proceedings were pending on that date. There is no right of appeal from a decision of an industrial tribunal except on a substantive question of law. The finding of the industrial tribunal was essentially one of fact which could not be challenged through appeal. It cannot be challenged before me also in an application for a writ of certiorari which cannot be issued to quash a finding of fact.

3. There was a controversy before the industrial tribunal whether the workmen appeared before Sri S.P. Mehra on 12 September 1953 at 10.30 a.m. with their explanations and whether he refused to receive the explanations. The case of Sri Mehra is that none of them appeared before him and he was obliged to hold the inquiry ex parte against them while the case of the applicants is that they appeared before him at the appointed time and that he refused to receive their explanations and that they consequently sent the explanations by post and they reached opposite party 3 on 14 September 1953. The tribunal was satisfied from the evidence that there was no truth in the case set up by the applicants and that they did appear before Sri Mehra during the inquiry. This again is a finding of fact which cannot be disturbed by me. It was open to Sri Mehra to proceed with the enquiry notwithstanding the absence of the workmen; they were at liberty to keep themselves away from the inquiry or not to submit any explanation and Sri Mehra was at liberty to enquire into. the charges without waiting for their presence or explanations. He examined some witnesses and took into account reports made against the workmen. The evidence was sufficient to prove the charges framed against the workmen. The industrial tribunal observed that it was not a court of appeal but a supervisory body and had no jurisdiction to substitute its own finding in place of that of the managing director and consequently refused to consider the evidence in respect of the charges produced before it by the workmen. In other words, the industrial tribunal held that it had no jurisdiction to hold a fresh inquiry into the charges framed against the workmen by the opposite party. The Appellate Tribunal upheld the view of the industrial tribunal. It was pressed upon me that both the tribunals acted illegally in refusing to consider the evidence of the applicants in defence of the charges.

4. Under Section 3 of the Uttar Pradesh Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, the State Government may by general or special order make provision for referring any industrial dispute for conciliation or adjudication in the manner provided in the order. When an industrial dispute has been referred for adjudication, the tribunal after completing its inquiry has to submit its award to the State Government and the State Government may either enforce or remit it for reconsideration. In exercise of the power conferred by Section 3 the State Government issued a general order No. 615 dated 15 March 1951, providing for conciliation boards and industrial tribunals. Under Para. 10 of the general order the State Government was authorized to refer any industrial dispute to the industrial tribunal for adjudication. The tribunal is authorized to frame its own rules and accordingly on 17 July 1951 the tribunal framed rules; but they deal with procedure only. Neither the Uttar Pradesh Industrial Disputes Act nor the order No. 615 lays down how the tribunal is to adjudicate an industrial dispute referred to it and by what substantive law it is governed. An industrial dispute may involve a dispute about facts and a dispute about the rights and liabilities arising out of the facts admitted or proved. The tribunal can adopt any method for ascertaining the facts when there is a dispute about them, there is no difficulty on this score. But when the facts are ascertained and the tribunal has to decide what are the rights and liabilities of the parties to the dispute, the question arises how it is to determine the rights and liabilities. The rights and liabilities are a matter of rules of law and the question is what rules of law is to be applied by the tribunal to the facts. There is the statutory law of contract which ordinarily governs the relations, between master and servants The Industrial Disputes Act and the general order No. 615 of 15 March 1951 contain some law but not all the law, affecting the relations between master and servant. To the extent they affect the relations, their provisions must be applied but otherwise there is no law that may be applied barring that contained in the Contract Act. The Industrial Disputes Act and the general order override or repeal the Contract Act in so far as their provisions are repugnant to those of the Contract Act, but the other provisions of the Contract Act remain fully operative and must be given effect to when applicable. An Act cannot be assumed to be repealed by another Act and the Industrial Disputes Act does not expressly repeal the Contract Act. To the extent that Industrial Disputes Act overrides the Contract Act, the latter can be implied to be repealed by the former, but otherwise it cannot be said to be repealed. Therefore, the law contained in the Industrial Disputes Act and the general order, and failing them, the law contained in the Contract Act, is all the law that the tribunal must apply to the admitted or proved facts to determine the parties rights and liabilities. The tribunal has been only given the power to adjudicate; it is only a substitute for a court of law. Just as a court of law would apply the law of contract (so far as it is not repealed by the Industrial Disputes Act) to a dispute taken to it for settlement, so also would the tribunal. There is nothing in the Industrial Disputes Act or the general order to suggest that the tribunal has not to apply the law of contract or that it has to adjudicate an industrial dispute without any regard to the provisions of the law of contract. Surely the tribunal could not have been authorized to act arbitrarily or regardless of all laws. When the Act and the general order do not say what law it should consider in adjudicating a dispute, it means that it has to consider the law that is in force and that a court of law has to consider. The State Industrial Disputes Act as also the Indian Industrial Disputes Act has been enacted to provide for settlement of industrial disputes. There are the ordinary courts of law settle any dispute about civil rights and liabilities arising between parties, but the Acts have been enacted to provide for settlement of disputes in a quicker, cheaper and leas formal manner. The object is served by constitution of tribunals with less rigid rules of procedure. It is not the object behind the Acts to provide for a different law of contract to govern the relations between industrial employers and employees. A machinery better suited to the settlement of industrial disputes is the object and not any change of substantive law. Therefore, it was not the object behind the Acts themselves to make any change in the substantive law of contract. In D.N. Banerji v. P.R. Mukherjee 1953 S.C.R. 302 : 1953 I L.L.J. 195 196, Chandrasekhara Ayyar, J., observed at p. 308 : 198:

the limited concept of what an industry meant in early times must now yield place to an enormously wider concept so as to take in various and varied forms of industry, so that disputes arising1 in connexion with them might be settled quickly without much dislocation and disorganization of the needs of society and in a manner more adapted to a conciliation and settlement than a determination of the respective rights and liabilities according to strict legal procedure and principles. The conflicts between capital and labour have now to be determined more from the standpoint of status than of contract.
The observation that the object behind the Industrial Disputes Act is to provide for conciliation and settlement gather than determination of the respective rights and liabilities according to the strict legal principles and that the disputes are to be settled more from standpoint of "status than of contract was made only to justify why a wider meaning should be given to the word "industry" The learned Judge had in mind the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act be far as they altered or repealed the provisions of the Contract Act. The learned Judge did not purport to decide what law should be applied by conciliation officers and industrial tribunals when disposing of industrial disputes and certainly did not mean to lay down that they were not governed by the law of contract so far as it has not been altered by the Industrial Disputes Act. Patanjali sastri, C.J., abserved in State of Madras v. C.P. Sarathy 1953 S.C.R. 334 : 1953 I L.L.J. 174 at p. 343 179:
The adjudication by the tribunal is only an alternative form of settlement of the disputes on a fair and just basis having regard to the prevailing conditions in the industry and is by no means analogous to what an arbitrator has to do in determining ordinary civil disputes according to the legal rights of the parties.
The observation was made in the course of an inquiry whether the Government's decision that an industrial dispute exists is justifiable or not. In Western India Automobile Association v. Industrial Tribunal, Bombay A.I.R. 1949 F.C. 111 : 1949 L.L.J. 245 at p. 120 256 it was observed by Mahajan, J.:
Adjudication does not, in our opinion, mean adjudication according to the strict law of master and servant. The award of the tribunal may contain provisions for settlement of a dispute which no court could order if it was bound by ordinary law but the tribunal is not fettered in any way by these limitations.
The question that cropped up in that case was whether it was open to a tribunal to order reinstatement of an employee found to have been wrongfully dismissed. An ordinary court of law will not reinstate the dismissed employee, but adjudication was held to be not governed by the same strict law of master and servant. Once it is found that dismissal of an employee is wrongful, the relief that a tribunal can grant may differ from the relief that can be granted by a court of law, but it does not follow that the law that a court of law would apply, when deciding whether the dismissal of an employee is wrongful or not, need not be applied by a tribunal when deciding the question. Subba Rao, J., stated in Ranganathan v. Madras Electric Tramways (1904), Ltd. that a tribunal is not confined within the bounds of legal rights as a civil court is and can shape its decisions to meet exigencies of varying situations, works in the realm of arbitration rather than in that of law, is not bound by contractual terms and can adjust the rights between the parties on an equitable plane. The learned Judge has not explained the basis for his observation why an industrial tribunal is not bound by the law of contract; ho has not referred to any provisions of the Industrial Disputes Acts or of any rules framed thereunder by the Government, and has not considered whether the law of contract is completely abrogated by the Acts, and if not, such provisions of it as are not repugnant to the Industrial Disputes Acts should not be enforced by a tribunal. According to Sinha, J., in Bank of India Ltd. v. Chairman and Members of the Labour Appellate Tribunal , though according to the law of contract an employer is entitled to dismiss an employee upon giving a reasonable notice, an industrial tribunal is justified in dealing with the question "from the point of view of unfair labour practice and industrial peace." Again there is no authority cited in support of the observation and it has not been disclosed how an industrial tribunal is invested with the power to disregard the existing law of contract (so far as it is not repealed or altered by the Industrial Disputes Act) and to be governed by principles subversive of the law of contract.
5. I receive considerable support for my view from Rex. v. the National Arbitration Tribunal Ex parte Horatio Growther & Co. Ltd. (1948) 1 K.B. 424. An industrial dispute was referred for adjudication to the National Arbitration Tribunal established under the Defence Regulations. The dispute included a claim by some dismissed workmen for reinstatement. The tribunal reinstated the workmen and the King's Bench issued a certiorari to quash the order of reinstatement. Lord Goddard, C.J., pointed out at pp. 430-431:

There are no express words either in the regulation or in the order which in terms give the tribunal any power to reinstate; but it is said that as they have power to deal with any question relating to employment or non-employment, it follows that it must have the power to make an award of reinstatement. It seems to me it is a strong thing to say, looking at this regulation which alone gives force to the order, that a power is thereby impliedly given to the tribunal to grant a remedy which no court of law or equity has ever considered it had power to grant. If an employer breaks his contract of service with his employees, either by not giving notice to which the latter are entitled, or by discharging them summarily for a reason which cannot be justified, the workmen's remedy is for damages only.
On p. 431 his lordship observed:
Supposing that the employers lout of deference to the award took the man back into their employment, I cannot find anything in the order or regulation which would disentitle them from giving notice, the next day or next week in accordance with the terms of the contract to any individual workman or to all of them. It is true that this tribunal can do what no court can, namely, add to, or alter the terms or conditions of the contract of service; express power so to do is given by the regulation, while there are no words conferring a power to reinstate or revive a contract lawfully determined.
It is clear from these observations that so far as the ordinary law of contract is not repealed or altered in relation to industrial disputes, it must be applied by an industrial tribunal while adjudicating an industrial dispute. If an industrial tribunal can disregard the ordinary law of contract, it is only by virtue of a power expressly conferred upon it by the Industrial Disputes Act. It cannot exercise any power not conferred upon it by the Industrial Disputes Act. This case was discussed by Mahajan, J., in the case of Western India Automobile Association (supra) but was not dissented from. In the Automobile Products of India Ltd. v. Rukmaji Bala , Das, J., observed at p. 1256 353 that during the pendency of proceedings under the Industrial Disputes Act "A ban has been imposed upon the ordinary right which the employer has under the ordinary law governing a contract of employment" to dismiss an employee. It follows that but for the ban imposed by the Industrial Disputes Act an employer would have his ordinary right to dismiss an employee, in other words that the law of master and servant would apply so far as it is not expressly altered by the Industrial Disputes Act.
6. Under the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 1946, standing orders consisting of the conditions of employment have to be prepared by all industrial establishments. Some of the matters to be provided for in the standing orders are "termination of employment, and the notice thereof to be given by employer and workmen," "bus-pension or dismissal for misconduct, and acts of omissions which constitute misconduct and "means of redress for workman against unfair treatment or wrongful exactions by the employer." Under Rule 19 of the standing orders a permanent workman's services may be terminated on a month's notice and pay for a month may be given in lieu of the notice. If the workman is not monthly rated only two weeks' notice or pay for two weeks in lieu of notice may be given for terminating his employment. Rule 22 defines "misconduct" which includes wilful insubordination, striking work, riotous or disorderly behaviour, etc. Under Rule 23 any workman, who is adjudged by the employer on examination. of the workman, if present, and of the facts to be guilty of misconduct is liable to be dismissed summarily without notice or compensation in lieu of notice. No order of dismissal for misconduct can be made unless the workman, if present, is informed in writing of the misconduct alleged against him and is given an opportunity to explain circumstances alleged against him. In awarding any punishment the employer is required to take into account the previous record of the workman. The standing orders are in the nature of a contract between the employer and the employees. The opposite party framed charges and gave the applicants an opportunity to be heard in answer to them. It recorded evidence and on its basis came to the finding that they were guilty of misconduct and dismissed them from service. No infringement of the standing orders of the law of contract was committed by the opposite party. It was for the opposite party to pass the order of dismissal and order of dismissal had to be passed on its satisfaction that they were guilty of misconduct. The question that was referred by the Government to the tribunal was whether their dismissal was wrongful or unjustified. This Involved three questions:

(1) whether they were found by the opposite party to be guilty of misconduct, (2) whether the correct procedure was followed by the opposite party in arriving at the finding, and (3) whether the misconduct could be visited with dismissal.
7. The answer to the first question depended upon the evidence in possession of the opposite party. Naturally the opposite party could act only on the basis of the evidence in its possession and not on the basis of evidence that might be produced subsequently before a higher authority or in a fresh inquiry. Therefore, the tribunal had to see whether the evidence in the opposite party's possession justified its finding of their being guilty of misconduct; it was not required to enter into another inquiry into the allegation of misconduct. It had no power to make an inquiry into the allegation itself and on the basis of evidence received by it to decide whether the finding of misconduct of the opposite party was correct or not. Since there might not be any connexion between the opposite party's finding of misconduct and the evidence received subsequently by the tribunal, one could not be justified on the basis of the other. The tribunal's duty being simply to ascertain whether the opposite party's finding was correct or not, it had to place itself in the position in which the opposite party was and then redecide the matter. It could hold that the evidence in the opposite party's possession did not justify the finding of misconduct, but it could not make an enquiry of its own into the allegation and on its result hold that misconduct was not proved. It, therefore, very rightly refused to consider the evidence it had itself recorded about the allegation of misconduct.

8. If it be true that the tribunal's powers were vast, it means that it had the power not to go into a matter that might, and ought to, have been raised before the opposite party. It certainly had the discretion to ignore the evidence produced before it by the workmen who ought to have produced it before the opposite party during the inquiry and it cannot be said to have acted illegally or refused to exercise jurisdiction by discarding all the evidence received by it.

9. The opposite party did not commit any. procedural mistake in the inquiry.

10. Once the opposite party decided that the workmen were guilty of misconduct, it was within its right to dismiss them. What punishment should be inflicted for the misconduct was within its discretion and the exercise of the discretion by it could, not be interfered with by the tribunal. I am not prepared to say that, it was not reasonable on the opposite party's part to dismiss the workmen who had been guilty of rowdyism and going on illegal strike. It could not tolerate such insubordination as was committed by them. In order to enforce discipline it was justified in adopting the most stringent measures. The tribunal did not act as an appellate authority and no power has been given to it to set aside its order which was not against any provisions of the Contract Act. It had no powers to substitute its own discretion in place of that of the opposite party and to reduce the punishment on the ground that it was excessive. Even a criminal appellate court should not interfere with a sentence inflicted by a trial court in its discretion unless the discretion has been exercised arbitrarily or illegally. The punishment of dismissal for the misconduct was in accordance with the standing orders and the tribunal could not hold that it was unjustified or wrongful.

11. I was referred to Batuk K. Vyas v. Surat Borough Municipality in which Chagla, C.J., held that a tribunal is concerned with the question whether on merits the employer was justified in discharging the workmen and had jurisdiction to go into the merits' of the dispute between the two. The learned Chief Justice did not mean that the tribunal had power to hold a fresh inquiry and then decide the dispute between the parties. It had power to decide the dispute but the decision was to be made on the basis of the inquiry held by the employer. None of these cases is an authority for the proposition that a tribunal can interfere with an order of an employer made in accordance with the standing orders and not in contravention of the Industrial Disputes Act or the law of contract. Therefore, the tribunal acted without jurisdiction in setting aside the dismissal of the ten workmen.

12. Under Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes (Appellate Tribunal) Act, 1950, an appeal lies to the Appellate Tribunal from a decision of an industrial tribunal if the appeal involves any substantial question of law. It was contended that the Appellate Tribunal could not entertain any appeal by the opposite party from the industrial tribunal's decision reinstating the ten workmen. The Appellate Tribunal did not discuss the question whether any substantial question of law was raised by the opposite party in the appeal before it, presumably because the applicants did not contend before it that the appeal was, incompetent on account of there being no substantial question of law. The Appellate Tribunal allowed the appeal on its being satisfied "that the tribunal below was not justified in interfering with the decision of the management to dismiss these employees." Though it has not expressly held that the appeal raised a substantial question of law, but since it entertained it and even allowed it, I would be justified in presuming that in its opinion a substantial question of law had been raised. This opinion is not binding on me and if I find that it did not raise any substantial question of law, I would have to hold that it had no jurisdiction to entertain the appeal. Its jurisdiction was conditional; it depended upon the existence of a substantial question of law. If there did not exist such a question, it could not usurp a jurisdiction by pretending that it existed. I am supported by Ranganathan v. the Madras Electri Tramways referred to above. A substantial question of law means a question having some substance in it. If a question hag already been authoritatively decided, or if there is no substance in it, it cannot be said to be a substantial question. Further the decision of a case must depend upon the answer to the question; if the decision would be one way, regardless of the answer to the question, it cannot be said to be a substantial question. In the case before the Appellate Tribunal the question was not merely of punishment but of jurisdiction of the industrial tribunal to interfere with the punishment inflicted upon the workmen without infringment of any law. It was an important question, because the decision of the appeal depended upon its answer. The contention raised by the opposite party had considerable force in it. A question of jurisdiction that is not raised in a light-hearted manner must be held to be a substantial question of law. In Kanpur Mazdur Congress v. K Spinning and Weaving Mills Co. Ltd. Malik, C.J., and V. Bhargava, J., laid down that whether an industrial court is entitled to interfere with the punishment inflicted by an employer in accordance with the standing orders on proof of a charge of misconduct is substantial question of law. The facts in that case were similar to those in the instant case and the Labour Appellate Tribunal was held to have jurisdiction, to hear the appeal. Since the Appellate Tribunal passed the order within its jurisdiction and since there is nothing illegal in it, it cannot be quashed by a certiorari.

13. The copy of the charge handed over to the workmen by the opposite party was not signed. This irregularity was of no consequence.

14. Kamla Kant Shukul, applicant, has not pressed his application because he has not been dismissed.

15. No case is made out for the issue of a writ of certiorari or a mandamus. The application is dismissed. Opposite parties 1 and 2 were not present, Opposite party 3 will get its costs of this petition from the applicants.
================================================================================


================================================================================
CASE 14:
[Cites 25, Cited by 2]
Delhi High Court
Roshan Lal Vohra vs Mcd & Others on 1 July, 2010
Author: G.S. Sistani
Bench: G.S.Sistani
*     IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

                               Judgment delivered on 1st July, 2010

+     W.P.(C) 8130/2009

M/S ROSHAN LAL VOHRA & ANR.              ..... Petitioners
               Through:  Mr. Shyam Moorjani, Advocate

                    versus

MCD & ORS.                                            ..... Respondents
                    Through:   Mr. H.S. Phoolka, Sr. Advocate with
                         Mr. Sanjeev Sabharwal, Advocate
      CORAM:
      HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE G.S.SISTANI

        1.     Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to see
               the Judgment ?
        2.     To be referred to the Reporter or not?
        3.     Whether the Judgment should be reported in the Digest?

G.S. SISTANI, J.
1. Rule. With the consent of counsel for the parties, writ petition is set down for final hearing and disposal.

2. The facts of the case, which have led to filing of the present petition, as stated in the writ petition, are that the petitioners, who are contractors, participated in a tender floated by the respondents. The tender was opened on 23.6.2007. After negotiations a work order was issued to the petitioners on 19.2.2008 and thereafter a formal agreement was also executed between the parties on 14.11.2008. As per the petitioners, they started the work on 28.2.2008 within the stipulated period. The completion period was 18 months i.e. by 27.8.2009. Petitioners after carrying out certain work of earth excavation, found that the work cannot be completed as hindrances existed at the site such as clusters of jhuggies, electric poles and further the designs provided by the respondents were faulty. The petitioners approached the respondents for revising the designs / drawings relating to the work as in case the designs were not revised the structure would collapse. The petitioners also submitted modified drawings and designs with the respondents, however, the respondents sat over the same.

3. It is submitted that the petitioners wrote a letter dated 6.5.2008 to respondent no.3 wherein petitioners clarified that the work had been started in the reach of about 100 meters; the remaining portion is thickly effected with encroachments on route, clusters of jhuggies are existing; and electric poles are also existing on the alignment. The respondents were also informed that further work is likely to get hindered till the encroachments are removed and clear site is made available to the petitioners.

4. The case of the petitioners is that despite the petitioners having pointed out to the respondents with regard to the difficulties being faced by them, the respondents did not bother to take any action for removal of obstructions nor handed over revised drawings. It is the case of the petitioners that in fact, the revised drawings were not received by the petitioners till the date of filing of the writ petition.

5. As per the petition, the petitioners received a communication dated 5.5.2008 from respondent no.3, by which respondent no.3, without addressing any of the issues raised by the petitioners, directed the petitioners to restart the work which had been held up for ten days, failing which action would be initiated. Petitioners are stated to have issued another communication to the respondents on 22.5.2008 wherein while reiterating the difficulties faced by the petitioners it was brought to the notice of the respondents that in case matters are not resolved within one week the petitioners would be constrained to dispense with the work without prejudice to their rights and contentions.

6. It is the case of the petitioners that respondent no.3 had realised its fault with regard to faulty drawings which were handed over to the petitioner initially and had referred the matter back to Water & Power Constancy Services (India) Ltd. (herein after referred to ―WAPCOS‖), who admitted that the drawings were faulty and had revised the drawings. However, as per the petitioners, neither the revised drawings were supplied to the petitioners nor the petitioners were informed about the same.

7. Respondent no.3 issued a show cause notice dated 27.5.2008 to the petitioners under Clause 2 of the contract wherein the petitioners were asked to reply as to why the compensation should not be levied upon them for not restarting the work. Respondent no.3 also issued a communication to the petitioners on 29.5.2008, by which, respondents had issued various clarifications in response to the petitioners' communication dated 6.5.2008. The petitioners were asked to complete the work and thus counsel for the petitioners submits that this communication superseded the show cause notice dated 27.5.2008.

8. Mr. Shyam Moorjani, learned counsel for the petitioners, submits that the respondents, without adverting to the issues raised by the petitioners, issued another show cause notice to the petitioners on 15.10.2008 pointing out that the progress of the work was slow. By a communication dated 20.10.2008, the petitioners informed respondent no.3 that the work cannot be resumed due to non-supply of revised drawings and designs. In response to this communication of the petitioners, respondent no.3 addressed a letter to the petitioners dated 24.10.2008 informing the petitioners that designs have been revised by WAPCOS, however, the petitioners' contention that despite the designs / drawings having been revised, a copy of the drawings were not handed over to them, was denied. In the same communication, it was also brought to the notice of the petitioners that the work was being carried out by the petitioner as per the revised drawings/designs of which the petitioners as well as the petitioners' site engineer are well aware and the work was held up on account of fault of the petitioners by not removing the malba/silt from the site.

9. It is contended by counsel for the petitioners that despite various verbal and written requests the respondents did not supply to the petitioners a copy of the revised drawings / designs, although the malba/silt was removed, excavation of earth work was completed and lean concrete laid at the site during the period from 23.10.2008 to 18.11.2008. The petitioners were, however, left with no option but to stop the work as the petitioners did not want to risk the lives of labourers to execute the structural work on their earlier faulty designs as the revised drawings and designs were not supplied to the petitioners. It is further contended by counsel for the petitioners that the petitioners were again informed by the respondents vide communication dated 1.12.2008 that they have carried out only 7% of the work and the work was held up since 18.11.2008. Petitioners were requested to expedite the progress so that the work can be completed within the stipulated period of time.

10. According to the petitioners, they had reliable information that in the revised drawings the consultant had altogether altered the designs and scope of the work and in view thereof the respondents were concealing the revised designs. The petitioners, by a communication dated 24.12.2008 addressed to respondent no.3, stated that the petitioners had learnt that designs and scope of the work were completely altered by the consultant agency. Petitioners clarified that they had completed the work to the tune of 20% and not 7% as alleged by the respondents. Petitioners further in its letter clarified to the respondents that the work had been held up for the approval of the designs and rates in the order of merit and conditions of the award letter.

11. It is contended by counsel for the petitioners that as per the work order dated 19.2.2008 when orders are given for execution of any extra/substitute item the petitioners had to obtain an order from the competent authority before executing the same to avoid any further complications. Therefore, the allegation with regard to supply of revised designs/drawings was per se false as even in case the designs had been supplied to the petitioners the work could not have been started as no order was given to the petitioners from the competent authority for executing the substituted items of work included due to revision of drawings/designs, which was one of the main reasons for the respondents in not providing a copy of the revised drawings to the petitioners and, thus, in fact, the respondents have played a fraud on the petitions and did not supply any copy of the drawings to the petitioners. It is further contended that the respondents were aware that the drawings have been completely changed and in case a copy of the same was handed to the petitioners, the petitioners would raise hue and cry and the erring respondents and officials would be in serious trouble as the earlier drawings were completely faulty. It is also contended that the respondents have made the petitioners a scapegoat.

12. Counsel for the petitioners submits that another show cause notice was issued to the petitioners under Clause (2) of the contract agreement on 5.1.2009. While referring to their earlier letter dated 24.12.2008, petitioner replied to the respondents vide letter dated 14.1.2009 rendering clarifications, reasons and the circumstances for not resuming the work for want of approval of designs and rates. The respondents instead of considering the reply, on 20.1.2009 issued another show cause notice to the petitioners as to why the action under clause, sub-clause 3(a), and / or 3 (b) and / or 3(c) of the agreement be not taken against the petitioners. Reply to the show cause notice dated 20.1.2009 was submitted by the petitioners on 28.1.2009 denying the allegations made by the respondents in their show cause notice. The respondents did not accept the stand of the petitioners and informed the petitioners vide letter dated 07.02.2009 that the respondents proposed to proceed against them in accordance with Clause 2 and 3 of the Contract Agreement and Clause 22 of the Contractor Enlistment Rules. However, with a view to adhere to the principle of natural justice a final opportunity of personal hearing was granted to the petitioners and the petitioners were directed to appear before the Chief Engineer VII on 16.2.2009 at 3.00 p.m. Thereafter by a communication dated 16.2.2009 personal hearing was fixed for 20.9.2009 at 3.00 p.m., on which date, petitioners are stated to have appeared and also gave written submissions on 21.2.2009. By a communication dated 25.2.2009 respondent no.3 supplied a copy of the speaking order passed by respondent no.2 on 24.2.2009 to the petitioners.

13. In consequence to the speaking order dated 24.2.2009 respondent no.3 vide order dated 16.3.2009 rescinded / determined the contract and fortified the earnest money and the security deposited. The respondents also took out such part of the work from the hands of the petitioners, which remained unexecuted, for giving it to another contractor for completion of the work. Further the right to claim compensation with regard to purchasing and procurement of any material and entering into any engagement by the petitioners had been curtailed and a notice for measurement of the work was given for 20.3.2009. On 16.3.2009 respondent no.3 had given a notice whereby the petitioners were called upon as to why the amount of Rs.36,84,846/- i.e. 10% of the contractual cost should not be recovered by the Department from the security deposit lying with the respondents within a period of seven day.

14. It is the case of the petitioners that these letters were received only on 21.2.2009 and 23.3.2009 by which date the stipulated time had already elapsed. The respondents thereafter passed an order dated 12.3.2009 debarring the petitioners from tendering in MCD for three years.

15. It is contended by counsel for the petitioners that the order dated 12.3.2009, debarring the petitioners, was passed without issuing any show cause notice and in total violation of the principles of natural justice. It is further contended that the order dated 24.3.2009, by virtue of which, the petitioners have been black listed as well as the order dated 12.3.2009 and also two orders dated 16.3.2009 are totally arbitrary, illegal, unreasonable and against the prescribed principles established by law. It is next contended that the orders passed by the respondents are unconstitutional, ex facie, colourable exercise of power and in violation of Articles 14(1)(g) and 21 of the Constitution of India and are, thus, liable to be quashed. It is also contended that the order of black listing has been passed without issuing any show cause notice as to why the petitioners should not be black listed, without giving any opportunity of hearing to the petitioners and thus the respondents have failed to comply with the principles of natural justice and in view of this the order of black listing is liable to be quashed.

16. Learned counsel for the petitioners submits that the orders passed by the respondents are with a view to tarnish the unblemished record of the petitioner of 50 years. Counsel further submits that the speaking order which has been passed is without any jurisdiction in view of the fact that the same has been passed by the Chief Engineer, who is not competent to pass the order. Counsel also submits that the contract has been rescinded with a view to save the skin of the officials of the MCD. Counsel next submits that the work had to be stopped by the contractor on account of two measure factors (i) that the site was not clear of obstructions, there were jhuggies and electric polls in the alignment of the work to be carried out; and (ii) revised drawings were not supplied to the petitioners.

17. Counsel for the petitioners has placed strong reliance on the communications issued by the petitioners dated 6.5.2008 wherein various issues were raised by the petitioners which were not addressed by the respondents, which led to the work coming to a standsill.

18. It is contended by learned counsel for the petitioners that petitioners made all efforts to carry on with the work and the work commenced from both the sides but had to stop on account of the fact that the obstructions were to be cleared by the MCD. The second issue, which has been raised by the petitioners for non- completion of work is that the revised drawings were not supplied to the petitioners. It is further contended that various letters were written by the petitioners to the MCD to supply the revised drawings but no satisfactory response has been received. The respondents were only trying to show by implication that revised drawings were handed over to the petitioners and there is nothing on record, which would show that, in fact, the revised drawings were handed over to the petitioners.

19. Learned counsel for the petitioners submits that, even otherwise, as per CPWD manual another copy of the revised drawings could have been handed over to the contractor on payment of Rs.1500/- which amount could either have been recovered by the MCD from the bills of contractor or demanded in cash. Counsel further submits that, in fact, the MCD wanted to shift the burden on the petitioners and with mala fide intentions the revised drawings were not handed over to the petitioners in view of the fact that as the concrete mixture had to be changed from M-20 to M-35 and on account of this revision, the expenditure of the project would have increased manifolds and in case of revised drawing only half the work could have been completed within the estimated cost. Even otherwise the MCD failed to grant prior permission in relation to the work which was to be carried out as per the revised drawing, as this was a condition precedent for carrying out additional and substitute work. Counsel further submits that the Orders dated 16.03.2009, by virtue of which, the contract of the petitioners has been rescinded is without any jurisdiction. Counsel also submits that the two orders dated 16.03.2009 (Annexure P-3) passed by the Executive Engineer are without any jurisdiction and that he was neither competent nor authorized to issue the orders as per the terms of the contract. Counsel next submits that to the best of the knowledge of the petitioners the structural designs have not been made in respect of the revised drawings and the same could not have been made without the participation of the petitioners as the MCD was to supply the sample of the necessary material. The second order dated 16.03.2009 has been assailed by the petitioners as the petitioners could not have imposed 10% penalty on the value of the contract as only the Superintending Engineer has the power of jurisdiction to impose the penalty and that too after giving a show cause notice and after granting hearing to the petitioners and only after the petitioners had admitted the breach could the damages have been imposed. The respondents cannot be a judge of his own cause and cannot pass the order against the petitioners.

20. Respondents have filed an affidavit in opposition to the writ petition as also the synopsis have been handed over in Court with supporting documents.

21. Mr. H.S. Phoolka, learned senior counsel for the respondents, submits that the present petition involves disputed questions of fact, which cannot be adjudicated upon in the present writ petition. Senior counsel further submits that the existence / removal of clusters of jhuggis, electrical poles, which as per the petitioners are a hindrance in execution of the work are strongly disputed as according to the MCD the work could have been executed and some work has, in fact, been executed without removal of the clusters of jhuggis and electrical poles. Senior counsel also submits that the second issue raised by the petitioners with regard to non-submission of revised designs / drawings is also vehemently denied and disputed as the petitioners were well aware of the revised drawings, which is evident from the fact that the petitioners had executed the allotted work as per the revised drawings. Senior counsel next submits that it is also a disputed question as to the extent of work executed by the petitioners, who have contended that they have executed 20% of the work, whereas as per the MCD only 7% of the awarded work has been executed, which has led to the cancellation of the contract.

22. It is contended by senior counsel for the respondents that the reasons for delay in execution of the work also cannot be adjudicated in the present proceedings which question would require detailed evidence and in view thereof petition under Article 226 of Constitution of India, is not the appropriate remedy and, thus, liable to be dismissed. It is further contended that the subject matter of the writ petition involves contractual disputes arising out of contract dated 14.11.2008 and the disputes have arisen during the execution of the contract and thus a writ court cannot adjudicate upon the disputes arising out of contractual matters. It is also contended by counsel for the respondent that the petitioners have failed to make out a strong prima facie case for judicial review of the action taken by the respondents as the respondents have issued repeated show cause notices to the petitioners granting opportunity of filing replies; personal hearing was also granted to the petitioners and thereafter a speaking order dated 24.2.2009 has been passed. The respondents have thus followed the due process of law and also complied with the principles of natural justice. The show cause notice dated 5.1.2009 was issued to the petitioner proposing action under Clause 2 of the Contract Agreement; show cause notice dated 20.1.2009 was issued to the petitioners proposing action under clause, sub-clause 3(a) and / or 3(b) and /or 3(c) of the Contract Agreement; and show cause notice dated 7.2.2009 was issued clearly stating that the MCD was contemplating to proceed against the petitioners under Clauses 2 and 3 of the Contract Agreement and Clause 22 of the Contract Enlistment Rules. Receipt of all the show cause notices issued to the petitioners have been admitted in the writ petition filed by the petitioners. Petitioners have also admitted that opportunity of personal hearing was also granted to them on 20.1.2009, 16.2.2009 and 20.2.2009 before the Chief Engineer VII of the MCD. The petitioner did not appear on two dates of hearing. The third opportunity of personal hearing was availed of by the petitioners.

23. It is submitted by learned senior counsel for the respondents that while passing the speaking order dated 24.2.2009 the submissions made by the petitioners have been duly considered by the respondents. It is further submitted that as far as the revised set of drawings are concerned the same was handed over to the Site Engineer of the Contractor as soon as the same was received from the consultant. It is also submitted that a copy of the revised designs / drawings was also handed over to the third party agency i.e. Sh. V.V. Arora, Scientist, NCCBM, and the Site Engineer. This fact was also intimated to the petitioners by EE(Pr)/Central-I vide communication dated 24.10.2008 and the petitioners by their letter dated 24.12.2008 has admitted that the designs and scope have been altered by the consultant agency and that the petitioners were in the knowledge of the requirement of M/35 grade of concrete in place of M/20 grade of concrete and as such the petitioners had alleged that approval of extra / substitute items were required as per the designs and drawings. It is further submitted that it is only after the drawings were supplied to the petitioners and a copy of the same was handed over to the third party in the presence of the Contractor, Sh. Anil Vohra, and his Site Engineer on 10.9.2008, could the petitioners have learnt that designs and scope had been altered and the grade of concrete was changed from M-20 to M-35 and a demand for extra/ substitute items could have been made. It is further submitted that in case the petitioners were interested in completing the work, the petitioners would have deposited Rs.1500/- and obtained another copy of the drawings. The work was resumed by the petitioners on 23.10.2008 and executed till 18.11.2008. The receipt of revised drawings / designs is also evident from the fact that it has been stated in para 13 of the writ petition that ―malba / silt was removed, excavation of earth work completed and lean concrete laid at the site during the period 23.10.2008 to 18.11.2008". It is also submitted that this averment would make it clear that for laying the lean concrete, revised drawings / designs were required. As far as demand of extra items is concerned, the changes / deviations in the quantities of item of the contract would be dealt with as per Clause 12 of the Contract Agreement.

24. It is submitted by learned senior counsel for the respondents that the petitioners have completed only 7% of the work is also evident from the fact that the running bill for the work carried out by the petitioners was paid in the month of November, 2008 and the petitioners have accepted the running bill to the tune of 7%. Thus, the submission that the 20% of the work has been completed is false. It is further submitted by counsel for the respondents that since even after lapse of 11 months only 7% of the work had been completed the show cause notice dated 5.1.2009 under Clause 2 of the Contract Agreement for poor progress of work was issued to the petitioners. It is also submitted As per the respondents the petitioners have been delaying the completion of the work without any justifiable reasons; MCD has not withheld the drawings / designs and, thus, the petitioners have rendered themselves liable for action for breach of the contract.

25. Learned senior counsel for the respondents submits that since the petitioners have committed breach of contract, they have not completed the work as per the schedule and have executed only 7% of the work after a lapse of 2/3 of stipulated period the petitioners are liable for action under Clause 2 of the Agreement and thus the MCD was well within its right to take the action against the petitioners on the basis of notice and the material on record and the order dated 16.3.2009 under Clause 2 of the Contract agreement was passed against the petitioners demanding the levy of Rs.36,84,846/- against the petitioners calculated @ 10% of the contractual cost of the work shown in the agreement.

26. In response to the submission made by counsel for the petitioners that the order dated 16.3.2009 regarding levy of compensation in accordance with Clauses 2 & 3 of the Contract is without jurisdiction as the Executive Engineer is not competent to pass the order, counsel for the respondents submits that the submission is without any merit. Mr. Phoolka, learned senior counsel for the respondents, relies upon Clause 3 of the Contract which reads as under:

(3) When contract can be determined Subject to other provisions contained in this Clause, the Engineer-in-charge may, without prejudice to his any other rights or remedy against the contractor in respect of any delay, inferior workmanship, any claims for damages and / or any other provisions of this contract or otherwise, and whether the date of completion has or has not elapsed, by notice in writing absolutely determine the contract in any of the following cases....‖

27. Learned senior counsel for the respondents submits that accordingly the Engineer-in-Charge is competent to pass the order under Clause 3 of the Contract Agreement as the Engineer-in- Charge means the Engineer Officer, who shall supervise and being incharge of the work and who shall sign the contract on behalf of the MCD. Senior counsel further submits that the contract has been signed by the Executive Engineer. Senior counsel also submits that the Executive Engineer has only communicated the order imposing the penalty on the petitioners and the same has been approved by the Chief Engineer and finally approved by the Commissioner, MCD.

28. I have heard counsel for the parties and also perused the pleadings as well as the annexures filed along with the writ petition as also submitted along with the synopsis. In this case the petitioners participated in a tender floated by the MCD, which was opened on 23.06.2007 and after negotiations the work order was issued in favour of the petitioners on 19.02.2008 and thereafter a formal agreement was also executed in favour of the petitioners on 14.11.2008. The petitioners were to start the work within ten days of issuance of the work order. The work was started on 28.02.2008 and the same was to be completed within 18 months i.e. by 27.08.2009.

29. It is the case of the petitioners that although the work commenced on time, it was held up on account of the fact that the site was not clear of obstructions (i) there were jhuggis besides electricity poles and (ii) revised drawings were not supplied to the petitioners. By a communication dated 06.05.2008, the petitioners had brought it to the notice of the MCD that according to the conditions of NIT the third party payment is to be made separately, however, since due weightage has not been considered at the time of preparation of justification and award of work has not been considered as such the amount is to be paid by the Department to the third party separately. A request was made that the third party payment may be made by the Department directly so that they may conduct their routine supervision for quality assurance. In the same communication, the petitioner brought to the notice of the MCD that the work is likely to get hindered till the encroachment is removed and clear site is made available. The MCD vide communication dated 05.05.2008 called upon the petitioners to restart the work which according to them had been held up for ten days, failing which action would be taken by the Department. The issues raised by the petitioners were also replied to by the respondents by a communication dated 28.05.2008. It would be useful to reproduce reply dated 29.05.2008:

MUNICIPAL CORPORATION OF DELHI OFF. OF THE EX-ENGINEER (M)-II JAL VIHAR, LAJPAT NAGAR, CENTRAL ZONE NEW DELHI.
             No.EE(M)-II/2008/238                    Dated 29/5/08

             Subject:-    Remodeling and covering of existing nalla along
Taimoor Nagar & Khizarbad Village in W.No.7, Central Zone.
W.P.No.:- 169/WW(M)-II/TC/CNZ/07-08 Dated:19.2.08. Agency:- M/s Roshan Lal Vohra & Sons, 38, Mahila Colony, Gandhi Nagar, Delhi.
May please refer your letter No.nil dated 06.05.08. The point-wise reply of the same is as under:
1. It is alleged that due weightage for third party payment had not been considered at the time of preparation of justification. At the time of negotiation, contractor is supposed to raise any objection in writing. In the instant case, contractor has not raised any objection in writing at the time of negotiation. Hence, it is understood that you have considered all such factors/aspects while negotiating the rates which are now final and binding on both the parties. As per NIT condition the payment of third party shall be born by the contractor as per Circular No.SE(QC)/06-07/D-2816 Dated 20.02.07.
2. It is alleged that cluster of jhuggies and electric poles exists in the alignment of drain. As per instruction of WAPCOS (Water & Power Constancy Services (India) Ltd.
A Govt. of India undertaking), Consultancy Agency, the work of remodeling and covering of existing nalla is to be started from down stream side. There is no hindrance in the shape of jhuggies and electric poles where the work is to be executed on the downstream side. A huge quantity of silt and malba had been gathered by you at the construction site and the same has not been removed by your agency. Due to which there is water logging on the upstream side in Maharani Bagh & Friends Colony. It is also added that the case of temporary encroachment removal in the shape of jhuggies and electric poles is also being perused and will be cleared before taking up the work in this reach. As such, there is no hindrance in portion on downstream side where construction is to be carried out.

3. It is alleged that there are deviations in the schedule of quantities. In this regard, it is stated that the design and estimate have been prepared by WAPCOS and the same is being followed. Hence, there is no deviation in quantities at present.

4. It is alleged that excavated earth is not being received by Okhla SLF. Excavated earth is not to be dumped in Okhla SLF, as the same is required for filing of creet way. Department has never asked to dispose excavated earth to Okhla SLF. You are required to dispose off the silt gathered by you and lying on downstream side to Okhla SLF, which is not being removed inspite of repeated request.

5. It is alleged that the work is in full swing and there is hindrance on account of revision of structural drawing for RCC work. The work was held up by you without any reason since 25.4.08 and the progress of work was also very slow in terms of work reference to be completed as per time schedule. The same has been intimated to you vide letter No.EE(M)-II/2008/D-148 dated 5.5.08 and EE(M)-II/TC/CZ/07-08/189 dated 13.5.08 respectively. As such, there is no dispute in the structural drawing for RCC work since; the same is designed by WAPCOS, a Govt. of India undertaking, which is being followed by department.

In view of above, you are again hereby directed to take up the work so as to complete the work within stipulated time.

EX-ENGINEER (M)-II M/s. Roshan Lal Vohra & Sons, 38, Mahila Colony, Gandhi Nagar, Delhi.

30. The respondents called upon the petitioners to restart the work by letter dated 05.05.2008 and thereafter first show cause notice dated 27.05.2008 was issued to the petitioners calling upon them to show cause within ten days as to why the compensation should not be levied upon them under Clause 2 of the contract agreement. Another show cause notice was issued to the petitioners on 15.10.2008 calling upon the petitioners to resume the work which had not been resumed despite verbal request. In response to this show case notice, the petitioners vide letter dated 20.10.2008 had pointed out to the respondents that due to revision of drawings/designs by the consultant M/s WAPCOS the work has been held up. The petitioners called upon the respondents to arrange for revised drawings and supply the same to them to enable them to resume the work. In response to this communication, the respondents informed the petitioners by a communication dated 24.10.2008 that the work was being done by the contractor as per the revised drawings / designs and one set of the drawings was handed over to Sh. V.V. Arora from NCCCBM and the real reason for the work being held up was due to non removing of malba/silt from the site. The letter dated 24.10.2008 reads as under:

MUNICIPAL CORPORATION OF DELHI OFFICE OF THE EX. ENGINEER (Pr.) CENTRAL-I SHIV MANDIR MARG, JAL VIHAR, LAJPAT NAGAR-I, NEW DELHI - 24.
No: - D/EE(Pr)C-I/08-09/811 Dated 24-10-08 To.
M/s Roshan Lal Vohra & Sons, 38, Mahila Colony, Gandhi Nagar, Delhi - 110031.
Name of Work :- Remodeling and Covering of existing nallah along Taimoor Nagar and Khizrabad village in W.No.:-7, Central Zone.
W.0.No.: -169/EE(M)-II/TC/CNZ/07-08 dated 19.02.08.
May kindly refer to your letter No. ‗NIL' dated 20.10.08 wherein you have mentioned that the held up work is not resuming by you due to revised drawings/design by the consultant M/s WAPCOS. It is well known fact that the work was being done as per revised drawings/design regarding which you as well as your site engineer are well aware. During IIIrd party visit by Sh. V.V. Arora from NCCBM on 10.09.08, it was also cleared that the work is being taken up as per revised drawings/design. One set of this was also handed over to Sh. V.V. Arora. Apart from it, drawings/design has not been changed completely and most of the things are same and is in your knowledge to be executed at site. Basically the work was held up due to not removing malba/silt from site for which department was making verbal requests to you. There was no any hindrance to continue the work of the side wall. Hence facts as mentioned in your letter are false and delay is being made by you. Higher officers are also aware of it. It is good that you have resumed the work on 23.10.08 after pursuance of department.
In view of facts as explained above, you are requested not to hold up the work in future so that the residents of area may not feel inconvenience due to the same.

Ex. Engineer (Pr)C-I

31. Another communication was addressed to the petitioners by the respondents on 01.12.2008 that the work was to be completed by 27.08.2009 and even after a lapse of nine months the progress achieved is only 7% approximately. The petitioners were also informed that the work is lying held up since 18.11.2008 without any reason and despite verbal requests, the work has not been resumed. In response to this communication, the petitioners vide letter dated 24.12.2008 refuted the allegation that the work had been held up without any reason. In the letter dated 24.10.2008 the petitioners informed the respondents that the designs and scope have been altogether altered by the consultant agency and they have been made to understand that the design mix of RCC has been changed from M-20 to M-35 which would thus invite change in specification and rates as well. It was also brought to the notice of MCD that the work is held up for the approval of designs and rates in the order of merit and condition of award letter as according to the award letter when the order was given for execution of any extra/substitute item prior orders from competent authority are to be obtained before execution of the same to avoid any further complication. Citing this condition the petitioners informed the MCD that till the decisions are conveyed the work cannot commence and further the item related to excavation are likely to devoid manifold and under such circumstances the approval of rates for further quantity would be required. The respondents in response to the aforesaid letter clarified to the petitioners that any extra/substitute item shall be payable under Clause 12 of the contract agreement. In the communication dated 20.01.2009 the following aspects were brought to the notice of the contractor:

―2.As per the design/section structure handed over to you, the RCC structure consists of M-30 & M-35 grade of concrete. You have been directed to execute the same a number of times and it is understood that any extra/substituted item on this account shall be payable to you under clause 12 of the contract agreement.
3. Further, any change/deviation in the quantity(s) of any item/items of the contract shall be dealt as per the clause 12 of the contract agreement. The contract agreement does not contain any clause for fixation of revised rates in case of deviation in quantities.
It is to further add that inspite of this office show cause notice dated 05.01.2009 under clause 2 of the contract agreement and subsequent opportunity of the personal hearing before SE(Pr.)-VII afforded to you for 20.1.2009, you have chosen not to present yourself before SE(Pr.)-VII.

From the above, it appears that you are no more interested in taking up the subject work.

Whereas, it appears to the undersigned that by reason of your wrongful delay or suspension of work or the work entrusted to you under the agreement referred to above, will not be completed within stipulated period.‖

32. A careful reading of the communications exchanged between the parties would show that while the petitioners have raised three basic issues i.e. (i) obstruction at the site; (ii) absence of revised drawings/designs; and (iii) revised rates not being fixed, on account of the changes in the revised drawings as reasons for non-completion of the work, the respondents have refuted all the three allegations in their communications, more particularly, letters dated 20.1.2009, 24.10.2008 and 29.5.2008. As per the communications addressed by the respondents to the petitioners there is no hindrance in the shape of jhuggies and electric poles and the work is to be executed on the downstream side. It is also the stand of the respondents that a huge quantity of silt and malba had been gathered by the petitioners at the construction site, which has not been removed due to which there is water logging in the upstream side in Maharani Bagh & Friends Colony. It is also the stand of the respondents that despite some jhuggis and electric polls, part of the work has been carried out by the petitioners and the remaining work can also be carried out. While the petitioners have taken a consistent stand that no revised drawings were supplied to them, the stand of the respondents including the stand taken in the communication dated 24.10.2008 is that, that not only that the revised drawings were handed over to the petitioners but the petitioners were well aware of the same, which is evident from the fact that part of the work has been carried out as per the revised drawings and petitioners had used the concrete of Grade M-35 as per the revised drawings and further some lean concrete work has also been carried out. The respondents have also placed strong reliance on the fact that another set of the drawings was handed over to Sh. V.V. Arora from NCCBM on 10.9.2008 in the presence of the petitioner. The stand taken by the petitioners, that the revised rates were not fixed, has also been refuted by the respondents while placing reliance on Clause 12 of the Contract Agreement, which deals with deviations/variations, extent and pricing. Accordingly, the present petition raises serious disputed questions of fact, which would require detailed examination of evidence and cannot be decided by this Court, in the present proceedings under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.

33. Learned counsel for the petitioners has placed reliance on ABL International Limited and Another Vs. Export Credit Guarantee Corporation of India Limited and Others, reported at (2004) 3 SCC 553, in support of his argument that in appropriate cases the writ court has jurisdiction to entertain a writ petition involving disputed questions of fact and there is no absolute bar in regard thereto.

34. While there is no quarrel that the aforesaid proposition urged by counsel for the petitioners, the Supreme Court has held in para 16 of the same judgment that a writ petition involving serious disputed questions of fact, which require consideration of evidence, which is not on record, will not normally be entertained by a Court in exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India. Having regard to the nature of disputes between the parties and the material placed on record, it is not possible for this Court to arrive at a finding as to the extent of work carried out by the petitioners (7% or 20%) which goes to the root of the matter, or whether there are hindrances in the form of jhuggies and electric poles in the entire area where the work is to be carried out only on the basis of some photographs placed on record to show jhuggies. While counsel for the petitioners has strongly argued that no revised drawings were supplied to the petitioners, it is the case of the respondents that not only were the revised drawings supplied to the petitioners, the petitioners have also carried out part of the work as per the revised drawings and, in fact, concrete of grade M-35 has been used instead of M- 20, as per the revised drawings. This is another issue, which cannot be decided by this Court as to whether, in fact, the petitioners have used grade M-35 concrete or have used grade M- 20 concrete. This Court has also carefully perused the impugned orders, which have been passed by the MCD on the touchstone of 3 basic principles of judicial review: (i) whether the same are illegal, (ii) irrational or (iii) while passing the same there has been some procedural impropriety. A perusal of the letters exchanged between the parties and various show cause notices issued to the petitioners would show that the respondents have fully complied with the principles of natural justice and have also granted the petitioners an opportunity of personal hearing in the matter and all issues raised stand decided and thereafter a speaking order has been passed. The speaking order has also considered the objections raised by the petitioners and in view of this I find no infirmity in the orders having been passed.

35. The nature of dispute in this case also arises out of a contract entered into between the parties and it is settled law that disputes relating to contracts cannot be agitated in proceedings instituted under Article 226 of the Constitution of India. In the case of the Life India Corporation of India & Others Vs. Asha Goel (Smt.) & Another, reported at (2001) 2 SCC 160, the Apex Court has disapproved entertaining of petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India by the High Court, in the matters of enforcement of contractual rights and obligations, particularly, when the claim of one party is contested. Para 10 of Life India Corporation of India & Others (supra) reads as under:

10. Article 226 of the Constitution confers extraordinary jurisdiction on the High Court to issue high prerogative writs for enforcement of the Fundamental Rights or for any other purpose. It is wide and expansive. The Constitution does not place any fetter on exercise of the extraordinary jurisdiction.
It is left to the discretion of the High Court. Therefore, it cannot be laid down as a general proposition of law that in no case the High Court can entertain a writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution to enforce a claim under a life insurance policy. It is neither possible nor proper to enumerate exhaustively the circumstances in which such a claim can or cannot be enforced by filing a writ petition. The determination of the question depends on consideration of several factors, like, whether a writ petitioner is merely attempting to enforce his/her contractual rights or the case raises important questions of law and constitutional issues; the nature of the dispute raised; the nature of inquiry necessary for determination of the dispute etc. The matter is to be considered in the facts and circumstances of each case. While the jurisdiction of the High Court to entertain a writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution cannot be denied altogether, Courts must bear in mind the self- imposed restriction consistently followed by High Courts all these years after the constitutional power came into existence in not entertaining writ petitions filed for enforcement of purely contractual rights and obligations which involve disputed questions of facts. The Courts have consistently taken the view that in a case where for determination of the dispute raised, it is necessary to inquire into facts for determination of which it may become necessary to record oral evidence a proceeding under Article 226 of the Constitution is not the appropriate forum. The position is also well settled that if the contract entered between the parties provide an alternate forum for resolution of disputes arising from the contract, then the parties should approach the forum agreed by them and the High Court in writ jurisdiction should not permit them to bypass the agreed forum of dispute resolution. At the cost of repetition it may be stated that in the above discussions we have only indicated some of the circumstances in which the High Courts have declined to entertain petitions filed under Article 226 of the Constitution for enforcement of contractual rights and obligation; the discussions are not intended to be exhaustive. This Court from time to time disapproved of a High Court entertaining a petition under Article 226 of the Constitution in matters of enforcement of contractual rights and obligation particularly where the claim by one party is contested by the other and adjudication of the dispute requires inquiry into facts. We may notice a few such cases; Mohammed Hanif v. State of Assam, (1969) 2 SCC 782; Banchhanidhi Rath v. State of Orissa, (1972) 4 SCC 781; Rukmanibai Gupta v. Collector, Jabalpur, (1980) 4 SCC 556; Food Corporation of India and Ors. v. Jagannath Dutta, 1993 Supp (3) SCC 635; and State of H.P. v. Raja Mahendra Pal and Ors., (1999) 4 SCC 43.

36. Reference can also be made to National Highways Authority of India v. Ganga Enterprises, (2003) 7 SCC 410, at page 415, wherein it has been held that:

―It is settled law that disputes relating to contracts cannot be agitated under Article 226 of the Constitution of India. It has been so held in the cases of Kerala SEB v. Kurien E. Kalathil1, State of U.P. v. Bridge & Roof Co. (India) Ltd.2 and Bareilly Development Authority v. Ajai Pal Singh 3 . This is settled law. The dispute in this case was regarding the terms of offer. They were thus contractual disputes in respect of which a writ court was not the proper forum. Mr Dave, however, relied upon the cases of Verigamto Naveen (2000) 6 SCC 293 (1996) 6 SCC 22 (1989) 2 SCC 116 v. Govt. of A.P. 4 and Harminder Singh Arora v. Union of India5. These, however, are cases where the writ court was enforcing a statutory right or duty. These cases do not lay down that a writ court can interfere in a matter of contract only. Thus on the ground of maintainability the petition should have been dismissed.‖
37. In the case of Pimpri Chinchwad Municipal Corpn. v. Gayatri Construction Co.,(2008) 8 SCC 172, at page 177, while considering various judgments, similar view has been expressed, holding:

"11. In matters relating to maintainability of writ petitions in contractual matters there are a catena of decisions dealing with the issue.
12. In National Highways Authority of India v. Ganga Enterprises6 it was inter alia held as follows: (SCC p. 415, para 6) ―6. The respondent then filed a writ petition in the High Court for refund of the amount. On the pleadings before it, the High Court raised two questions viz.: (a) whether the forfeiture of security deposit is without authority of law and without any binding contract between the parties and also contrary to Section 5 of the Contract Act; and
(b) whether the writ petition is maintainable in a claim arising out of a breach of contract. Question (b) should have been first answered as it would go to the root of the matter. The High Court instead considered Question (a) and then chose not to answer Question (b). In our view, the answer to Question (b) is clear. It is settled law that disputes relating to contracts cannot be agitated under Article 226 of the Constitution of India. It has been so held in Kerala SEB v. Kurien E. Kalathil7, State of U.P. v.
Bridge & Roof Co. (India) Ltd.8 and Bareilly Development Authority v. Ajai Pal Singh 9 . This is settled law. The dispute in this case was regarding the terms of offer. They were thus contractual disputes in respect of which a writ court was not the proper forum. Mr Dave, however, relied upon Verigamto Naveen v. Govt. of A.P. 10 and (2001) 8 SCC 344 (1986) 3 SCC 247 (2003) 7 SCC 410 (2000) 6 SCC 293 (1996) 6 SCC 22 (1989) 2 SCC 116 (2001) 8 SCC 344 Harminder Singh Arora v. Union of India 11 . These, however, are cases where the writ court was enforcing a statutory right or duty. These cases do not lay down that a writ court can interfere in a matter of contract only. Thus on the ground of maintainability the petition should have been dismissed.‖

13. In Kerala SEB v. Kurien E. Kalathil2 this Court dealt with the question of maintainability of petition under Article 226 of the Constitution and the desirability of exhaustion of remedies and availability of alternative remedies, as also difference between statutory contracts and non-statutory contracts. In paras 10 and 11 of the judgment it was noted as follows: (SCC pp. 298-99) ―10. We find that there is a merit in the first contention of Mr Raval. Learned counsel has rightly questioned the maintainability of the writ petition. The interpretation and implementation of a clause in a contract cannot be the subject-matter of a writ petition. Whether the contract envisages actual payment or not is a question of construction of contract. If a term of a contract is violated, ordinarily the remedy is not the writ petition under Article 226. We are also unable to agree with the observations of the High Court that the contractor was seeking enforcement of a statutory contract. A contract would not become statutory simply because it is for construction of a public utility and it has been awarded by a statutory body. We are also unable to agree with the observation of the High Court that since the obligations imposed by the contract on the contracting parties come within the purview of the Contract Act, that would not make the contract statutory. Clearly, the High Court fell into an error in coming to the conclusion that the contract in question was statutory in nature.

11. A statute may expressly or impliedly confer power on a statutory body to enter into contracts in order to enable it to discharge its functions. Dispute arising out of the terms of such contracts or alleged breaches have to be settled by the ordinary principles of law of contract. The fact that one of the parties to the agreement is a statutory or public body will not by (1986) 3 SCC 247 itself affect the principles to be applied. The disputes about the meaning of a covenant in a contract or its enforceability have to be determined according to the usual principles of the Contract Act. Every act of a statutory body need not necessarily involve an exercise of statutory power. Statutory bodies, like private parties, have power to contract or deal with property. Such activities may not raise any issue of public law. In the present case, it has not been shown how the contract is statutory. The contract between the parties is in the realm of private law. It is not a statutory contract. The disputes relating to interpretation of the terms and conditions of such a contract could not have been agitated in a petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India. That is a matter for adjudication by a civil court or in arbitration if provided for in the contract. Whether any amount is due and if so, how much and refusal of the appellant to pay it is justified or not, are not the matters which could have been agitated and decided in a writ petition. The contractor should have relegated to other remedies.‖

14. Reference can also be made to State of Gujarat v. Meghji Pethraj Shah Charitable Trust 12 . In para 22 it was observed as follows: (SCC pp. 568-69) ―22. We are unable to see any substance in the argument that the termination of arrangement without observing the principle of natural justice (audi alteram partem) is void. The termination is not a quasi-judicial act by any stretch of imagination; hence it was not necessary to observe the principles of natural justice. It is not also an executive or administrative act to attract the duty to act fairly. It was--as has been repeatedly urged by Shri Ramaswamy--a matter governed by a contract/agreement between the parties. If the matter is governed by a contract, the writ petition is not maintainable since it is a public law remedy and is not available in private law field e.g. where the matter is governed by a non-statutory contract. Be that as it may, in view of our opinion on 7 (1994) 3 SCC 552 the main question, it is not necessary to pursue this reasoning further.‖

15. Again, in State of U.P. v. Bridge & Roof Co. (India) Ltd.3 this Court dealt with the issue in paras 15 and 16 in the following manner: (SCC p. 30) ―15. In our opinion, the very remedy adopted by the respondent is misconceived. It is not entitled to any relief in these proceedings i.e. in the writ petition filed by it. The High Court appears to be right in not pronouncing upon any of the several contentions raised in the writ petition by both the parties and in merely reiterating the effect of the order of the Deputy Commissioner made under the proviso to Section 8-D(1).

16. Firstly, the contract between the parties is a contract in the realm of private law. It is not a statutory contract. It is governed by the provisions of the Contract Act or, maybe, also by certain provisions of the Sale of Goods Act. Any dispute relating to interpretation of the terms and conditions of such a contract cannot be agitated, and could not have been agitated, in a writ petition. That is a matter either for arbitration as provided by the contract or for the civil court, as the case may be. Whether any amount is due to the respondent from the appellant Government under the contract and, if so, how much and the further question whether retention or refusal to pay any amount by the Government is justified, or not, are all matters which cannot be agitated in or adjudicated upon in a writ petition. The prayer in the writ petition viz. to restrain the Government from deducting a particular amount from the writ petitioner's bill(s) was not a prayer which could be granted by the High Court under Article 226. Indeed, the High Court has not granted the said prayer.‖

16. At para 11 of India Thermal Power Ltd. v. State of M.P.13 it was observed as follows: (SCC pp. 386-87, para 11) ―11. It was contended by Mr Cooper, learned Senior Counsel appearing for appellant GBL and also by some (2000) 3 SCC 379 counsel appearing for other appellants that the appellant/IPPs had entered into PPAs under Sections 43 and 43-A of the Electricity Supply Act and as such they are statutory contracts and, therefore, MPEB had no power or authority to alter their terms and conditions. This contention has been upheld by the High Court. In our opinion the said contention is not correct and the High Court was wrong in accepting the same. Section 43 empowers the Electricity Board to enter into an arrangement for purchase of electricity on such terms as may be agreed. Section 43-A(1) provides that a generating company may enter into a contract for the sale of electricity generated by it with the Electricity Board. As regards the determination of tariff for the sale of electricity by a generating company to the Board, Section 43-A(2) provides that the tariff shall be determined in accordance with the norms regarding operation and plant-load factor as may be laid down by the authority and in accordance with the rates of depreciation and reasonable return and such other factors as may be determined from time to time by the Central Government by a notification in the Official Gazette. These provisions clearly indicate that the agreement can be on such terms as may be agreed upon by the parties except that the tariff is to be determined in accordance with the provision contained in Section 43-A(2) and notifications issued thereunder. Merely because a contract is entered into in exercise of an enabling power conferred by a statute that by itself cannot render the contract a statutory contract. If entering into a contract containing the prescribed terms and conditions is a must under the statute then that contract becomes a statutory contract. If a contract incorporates certain terms and conditions in it which are statutory then the said contract to that extent is statutory. A contract may contain certain other terms and conditions which may not be of a statutory character and which have been incorporated therein as a result of mutual agreement between the parties. Therefore, the PPAs can be regarded as statutory only to the extent that they contain provisions regarding determination of tariff and other statutory requirements of Section 43-A(2). Opening and maintaining of an escrow account or an escrow agreement are not the statutory requirements and, therefore, merely because PPAs contemplate maintaining escrow accounts that obligation cannot be regarded as statutory.‖

17. Therefore, the High Court ought not to have entertained the writ petition. Additionally, it appears that by order dated 17-1-2007 interim stay of the impugned order was granted and was continued by order dated 12-2-2007. It is pointed out by learned counsel for the appellants that since the order of the High Court was stayed and there was urgency in the matter, fresh tenders were called for. Three persons submitted the bids and the work has already been allotted and a considerable portion of the work has already been completed. In view of the aforesaid, we set aside the impugned order of the High Court and direct dismissal of the writ petition. It is however open to the respondent-writ petitioners to seek such remedy, if so advised, as is available in law. We do not express any opinion in that regard."

38. As far as the order of blacklisting the petitioner is concerned, during the course of hearing, counsel for the respondents, however, has been unable to show that whether any show cause notice was issued to the petitioners as to why the petitioners should not be debarred/black listed for a period of three years neither any order has been placed on record nor any record has been produced to show that any hearing was granted to the petitioners on this issue of black-listing the petitioner. Apparently, the respondents have issued a Circular dated 24.3.2009, which reads as under:

MUNICIPAL CORPORATION OF DELHI ENGINEERING DEPARTMENT (HQ) TOWN HALL, DELHI - 110 006 No.G-IV/Engg./HQ/2008-09/5025 Date: 24-3-2009 CIRCULAR The Commissioner, MCD vide order dated 12-3-2009 has debarred M/s Roshan Lal Vohra & Sons, R/o, 38, Mahila Colony, Gandhi Nagar, Delhi-31 for tendering with MCD for a Period of three years on account of non execution of work awarded against work orders No.169/EE(M)-II/TC/CNZ/07-8 dated 19-2-08.
This is notified & circulated to all concerned for information and necessary action.
Addl. Dy. Commissioner Engineering Deptt. (HQ) Distribution:
1. M/s Roshan Lal Vohra & Sons, R/o 38, Mahila Colony, Gandhi Nagar, Delhi-31.
2. All Chief Engineers
3. Chief Engineer (Slum & JJ, MCD)
4. All Supdtg. Engineers
5. All Ex. Engineers
6. AO/IT
7. EE(Pr)-I/Central Zone alongwith original main file containing orders of the Commissioner, MCD Page No.1/N to 16/N and 1/C to 56/C Copy for kind information:-
1. Addl. Commissioner (Engg.)
2. ME-cum-E-in-C Addl. Dy. Commissioner Engineering Deptt. (HQ)
39. Counsel for the petitioners has also submitted that the order dated 24.3.2009 debarring the petitioners for a period of three years has also not been passed by the competent authority. Although counsel for the respondents submits that the powers of Enlistment Committee have been delegated by the Commissioner, MCD, himself in accordance with Section 491 of the DMC Act. This question need not be decided by this Court in view of the fact that the order of blacklisting has been passed without following the principles of natural justice and the settled position of law. The respondents have failed to follow any fair procedure and intimate the petitioners about the possible blacklisting.

40. In the case of M/s Erusion Equipment and Chemicals etc. Ltvs. V. State of West Bengal, reported at AIR 1975 SC 266, which was followed by the Supreme Court in the case of Raghunath Thakur v. State of Bihar and Others, reported at AIR 1989 SC 620 as well as in the judgments of this Court including M/s National Building Construction Corporation Limited v. New Delhi Municipal Council, reported at 2007 (2) R.A.J. 162 (Del), it has been well settled that since the proposal of black-listing entails civil consequences, order of black-listing, should be passed after following the principles of natural justice. In para 4 of Raghunath Thakur (supra) it was held as under:

4. Indisputably, no notice had been given to the appellant of the proposal of blacklisting the appellant. It was contended on behalf of the State Government that there was no requirement in the rule of giving any prior notice before blacklisting any person. In so far as the contention that there is no requirement specifically of giving any notice is concerned, the respondent is right.
But it is an implied principle of the rule of law that any order having civil consequence should be passed only after following the principles of natural justice. It has to be realized that blacklisting any person in respect of business ventures has civil consequence for the future business of the person concerned in any event. Even if the rules do not express so, it is an elementary principle of natural justice that parties affected by any order should have right of being heard and making representation against the order. In that view of the matter, the last portion of the order in so far as it directs blacklisting of the appellant in respect of future contracts, cannot be sustained in law. In the premises, that portion of the order directing the appellant be placed in the blacklist in respect of future contracts under the Collector is set aside. So far as the cancellation of the bid of the appellant is concerned, that is not affected. This order will, however, not prevent the State Government or the appropriate authorities from taking any future steps for blacklisting the appellant if the Government is entitled to do so in accordance with law, i.e. giving the appellant due notice and an opportunity of making representation. After hearing the appellant, the State Government will be at liberty to pass any order in accordance with law indicating the reasons therefor. We, however, make it quite clear that we are not expressing any opinion on the correctness or otherwise of the allegations made against the appellant. The appeal is thus disposed of.‖

41. Further in the case of M/s Erusian Equipment and Chemicals etc. Ltd. (supra), it has been held as under:

―Blacklisting has the effect of preventing a person from the privilege and advantage of entering into lawful relationship with the Government for purposes of gains. The fact that a disability is created by the order of blacklisting indicates that the relevant authority is to have an objective satisfaction. Fundamentals of fair play require that the person concerned should be given an opportunity to represent his case before he is put on the blacklist.‖
42. Applying the aforesaid principles to the facts of this case, I find that before passing the order of blacklisting no specific notice to show cause was issued to the petitioners as to why the petitioners should not be blacklisted for a period of three years. Even otherwise, no order of blacklisting has been served upon the petitioners, neither a copy thereof has been filed in Court. Accordingly, the order dated 24.3.2009, blacklisting the petitioners for a period of three years, is quashed on the ground that the respondents have failed to follow the principles of natural justice.

43. I find no force in the submission made by counsel for the petitioners that the orders dated 24.3.2009 as also 16.3.2009 are liable to be quashed in view of the fact that the same has not been passed by the competent authority. Counsel for the petitioners has submitted that a reading of Clause 3 of the Contract Agreement would show that it is the Engineer-in-Charge, who is competent to pass the order. In response to this submission, counsel for the respondents has submitted that the order has been passed by the Superintending Engineer, who was also the Engineer-in-Charge of the work, in question.

44. A perusal of the order dated 16.3.2009 itself would show that in the order itself the Executive Engineer has stated that ―I Ajay Aggarwal, the Engineer-in-Charge of the aforesaid work under the aforesaid agreement......‖. Since the Executive Engineer was the Engineer-in-Charge of the work, it cannot be said that the order has not been passed by an authorized person. As far as the order passed under Clause 2 of the Contract Agreement is concerned, it is stated by counsel for the petitioners that the aforesaid order has been passed by the Executive Engineer whereas the same should have been passed by the Superintending Engineer. Learned senior counsel for the respondents has clarified that by the order dated 16.3.2009 the Executive Engineer has only issued the communication to the petitioners and not passed the order, which is evident after reading the order itself, wherein it has been stated that the competent authority has decided and determined that the petitioners are liable to pay Rs.36,84,846/-.

45. In the facts and circumstances of this case as observed earlier, it is not possible for this Court in the proceedings under Article 226 of the Constitution of India to decide disputed questions of fact and the dispute arises out of a contract entered into between the parties. Thus, no relief can be granted to the petitioners with respect to two orders passed on 16.3.2009. It will be open to the petitioners to seek such remedies, as may be available to them in accordance with law. It is clarified that any observations made by this Court shall not come in the way of the petitioners in seeking appropriate remedy.

46. Writ petition is partly allowed. No orders as to costs.

G.S. SISTANI, J.

July 1st, 2010 'msr/ssn'

Related AI tags, queries and research notes
Translation

Select Language
Top AI Tags
appeal-high-court < writ-petition-high-court
contract
Related user Queries
statutory contract what is
principles of natural justice
disputed question of facts
black listing
article 226 of constitution
encroachment as is where is
wapcos
STATUTORY BODY
civil consequence
speaking order
Personal hearing
settled law
contract act
BRIDGE & ROOF CO. (INDIA) LTD
escrow
engineer in charge
writ petition under article 226
contractual disputes
work order
Blacklist filter: tender conditions
About
Disclaimer
Privacy Policy
Terms
Case
================================================================================


================================================================================
CASE 15:
[Cites 60, Cited by 0]
Allahabad High Court
2875. In Karbalai Begum vs . Mohd. Sayeed (1980) 4 on 28 November, 1858
1
                                                                   2751

        sections 390 and 398). It is the intention to claim adversely
        accompanied by such an invasion of the rights of the
        opposite party as gives him a cause of action which
        constitutes adverse possession."
2874.         It further held:
              "Consonant with this principle the commencement of
        adverse possession, in favour of a person, implies that that
        person is in actual possession, at the time, with a notorious
        hostile claim of exclusive title, to repel which, the true
        owner would then be in a position to maintain an action. It
        would follow that whatever may be the animus or intention
        of a person wanting to acquire title by adverse possession
        his adverse possession cannot commence until site
        animus."
2875.         In Karbalai Begum Vs. Mohd. Sayeed (1980) 4
SCC 396 in the context of a co-sharer, it was held:
        "...It is well settled that mere non- participation in the rent
        and profits of the land of a co-sharer does not amount to an
        ouster so as to give title by adverse possession to the other
        co-sharer in possession."
2876.         In Annasaheb Bapusaheb Patil Vs. Balwant (1995)
2 SCC 543 the Court, in para 15, said:
        "15. Where possession can be referred to a lawful title, it
        will not be considered to be adverse. The reason being that
        a person whose possession can be referred to a lawful title
        will not be permitted to show that his possession was
        hostile to another's title. One who holds possession on
        behalf of another, does not by mere denial of that other's
        title make his possession adverse so as to give himself the
        benefit of the statute of limitation. Therefore, a person who
                                                                  2752

        enters into possession having a lawful title, cannot divest
        another of that title by pretending that he had no title at
        all."
2877.           In Vidya Devi Vs. Prem Prakash (1995) 4 SCC 496
the Court in paras 27 and 28 held:
        "27...it will be seen that in order that the possession of co-
        owner may be adverse to others, it is necessary that there
        should be ouster or something equivalent to it. This was
        also the observation of the Supreme Court in P. Lakshmi
        Reddy case which has since been followed in Mohd.
        Zainulabudeen v. Sayed Ahmed Mohideen.
        28. 'Ouster' does not mean actual driving out of the co-
        sharer from the property. It will, however, not be complete
        unless it is coupled with all other ingredients required to
        constitute adverse possession. Broadly speaking, three
        elements are necessary for establishing the plea of ouster
        in the case of co-owner. They are (i) declaration of hostile
        animus, (ii) long and uninterrupted possession of the
        person pleading ouster, and (iii) exercise of right of
        exclusive ownership openly and to the knowledge of other
        co-owner. Thus, a co-owner, can under law, claim title by
        adverse possession against another co-owner who can, of
        course, file appropriate suit including suit for joint
        possession within time prescribed by law."
2878.           In making above observations, the Court also relied
on its earlier decisions in P. Lakshmi Reddy (supra) and
Mohd. Zainulabudeen Vs. Sayed Ahmad Mohideen (1990) 1
SCC 345.
2879.           In Roop Singh Vs. Ram Singh (2000) 3 SCC 708 it
was held that if the defendant got the possession of suit land as a
                                                                      2753

lessee or under a batai agreement then from the permissive
possession it is for him to establish by cogent and convincing
evidence to show hostile animus and possession adverse to the
knowledge of the real owner. Mere possession for a long time
does not result in converting permissive possession into adverse
possession. The Court relied on its earlier decisions in Thakur
Kishan Singh (supra).
2880.         In Darshan Singh Vs. Gujjar Singh (2002) 2 SCC
62 in para 7 and 9, the Court held:
        "...It is well settled that if a co-sharer is in possession of the
        entire property, his possession cannot be deemed to be
        adverse for other co-sharers unless there has been an
        ouster of other co-sharers."
        "9.   In our view, the correct          legal position is that
        possession of a property belonging to several co-sharers by
        one co-sharer shall be deemed that he possesses the
        property on behalf of the other co-sharers unless there has
        been a clear ouster by denying the title of other co-sharers
        and mutation in the revenue records in the name of one co-
        sharer would not amount to ouster unless there is a clear
        declaration that title of the other co-sharers was denied."
2881.         In order to defeat title of a plaintiff on the ground of
adverse possession it is obligatory on the part of the respondent
to specifically plead and prove as to since when their possession
came adverse. If it was permissive or obtained pursuant to some
sort of arrangement, the plea of adverse possession would fail.
In Md. Mohammad Ali Vs. Jagadish Kalita & Ors. (2004) 1
SCC 271 with reference to a case dealing with such an issue
amongst co-sharers it was observed that "Long and continuous
possession by itself, it is trite, would not constitute adverse
                                                                     2754

possession. Even non-participation in the rent and profits of the
land to a co-sharer does not amount to ouster so as to give title
by prescription.
2882.         It was also observed in para 21 that for the purpose
of proving adverse possession/ouster, the defendant must also
prove animus possidendi.
2883.         In Amrendra Pratap Singh (supra) considering as
to what is adverse possession, the Court in para 22 observed :
              "What is adverse possession? Every possession is
        not, in law, adverse possession. Under Article 65 of the
        Limitation Act, 1963, a suit for possession of immovable
        property or any interest therein based on title can be
        instituted within a period of 12 years calculated from the
        date when the possession of the defendant becomes adverse
        to the plaintiff. By virtue of Section 27 of the Limitation
        Act, at the determination of the period limited by the Act to
        any person for instituting a suit for possession of any
        property, his right to such property stands extinguished.
        The process of acquisition of title by adverse possession
        springs into action essentially by default or inaction of the
        owner. A person, though having no right to enter into
        possession of the property of someone else, does so and
        continues in possession setting up title in himself and
        adversely to the title of the owner, commences prescribing
        title into himself and such prescription having continued
        for a period of 12 years, he acquires title not on his own
        but on account of the default or inaction on part of the real
        owner, which stretched over a period of 12 years results
        into extinguishing of the latter's title. It is that extinguished
        title of the real owner which comes to vest in the
                                                                 2755

        wrongdoer. The law does not intend to confer any premium
        on the wrong doing of a person in wrongful possession; it
        pronounces the penalty of extinction of title on the person
        who though entitled to assert his right and remove the
        wrong doer and re-enter into possession, has defaulted and
        remained inactive for a period of 12 years, which the law
        considers reasonable for attracting the said penalty.
        Inaction for a period of 12 years is treated by the Doctrine
        of Adverse Possession as evidence of the loss of desire on
        the part of the rightful owner to assert his ownership and
        reclaim possession."
2884.         However, the Court further observed that if
property, by virtue of some statutory provisions or otherwise, is
alienable, the plea of adverse possession may not be available
and held. :
              "23. The nature of the property, the nature of title
        vesting in the rightful owner, the kind of possession which
        the adverse possessor is exercising, are all relevant factors
        which enter into consideration for attracting applicability
        of the Doctrine of Adverse Possession. The right in the
        property ought to be one which is alienable and is capable
        of being acquired by the competitor. Adverse possession
        operates on an alienable right. The right stands alienated
        by operation of law, for it was capable of being alienated
        voluntarily and is sought to be recognized by doctrine of
        adverse possession as having been alienated involuntarily,
        by default and inaction on the part of the rightful claimant,
        who knows actually or constructively of the wrongful acts
        of the competitor and yet sits idle. Such inaction or default
        in taking care of one's own rights over property is also
                                                                 2756

        capable of being called a manner of 'dealing' with one's
        property which results in extinguishing one's title in
        property and vesting the same in the wrong doer in
        possession of property and thus amounts to 'transfer of
        immovable property' in the wider sense assignable in the
        context of social welfare legislation enacted with the object
        of protecting a weaker section."
2885.         The Court also observed that the judicial precedents
should not be stressed too harsh and observed:
              "A judicial decision is an authority for what it
        actually decides and not for what can be read into it by
        implication or by assigning an assumed intention to the
        Judges, and inferring from it a proposition of law which
        the Judges have not specifically laid down in the
        pronouncement." (Para 28)
2886.         In para 14 of the judgment in Amrendra Pratap
Singh (supra), the Court also deprecated the practice of
following dictionary meaning as absolute while interpreting
statute and said :
              "Dictionaries can be taken as safe guides for finding
        out meanings of such words as are not defined in the
        statute. However, dictionaries are not the final words on
        interpretation. The words take colour from the context and
        the setting in which they have been used. It is permissible
        to assign a meaning of a sense, restricted or wider than the
        one given in dictionaries, depending on the scheme of the
        legislation wherein the word has been used."
2887.         In L.N. Aswathama & another Vs. V.P. Prakash
JT 2009 (9) 527 the Court, in para 17 and 18 said:
        "17. The legal position is no doubt well settled. To
                                                                2757

        establish a claim of title by prescription, that is adverse
        possession for 12 years or more, the possession of the
        claimant must be physical/actual, exclusive, open,
        uninterrupted, notorious and hostile to the true owner
        for a period exceeding twelve years. It is also well settled
        that long and continuous possession by itself would not
        constitute adverse possession if it was either permissive
        possession or possession without animus possidendi. The
        pleas based on title and adverse possession are mutually
        inconsistent and the latter does not begin to operate until
        the former is renounced. Unless the person possessing
        the property has the requisite animus to possess the
        property hostile to the title of the true owner, the period
        for prescription will not commence."
              "18. ...When a person is in possession asserting to be
        the owner, even if he fails to establish his title, his
        possession would still be adverse to the true owner.
        Therefore, the two pleas put forth by the defendant in
        this case are not inconsistent pleas but alternative pleas
        available on the same facts. Therefore, the contention of
        the plaintiffs that the plea of adverse possession is not
        available to defendant is rejected."
2888.         Further, in para 25 the Court said :
        "25. When defendant claimed title and that was proved to
        be false or fabricated, then the burden is heavy upon
        him to prove actual, exclusive, open, uninterrupted
        possession for 12 years. In this case we have already held
        that he did not make out such possession for 12 years prior
        to the suit."
2889.         Where a plea of adverse possession is taken, the
                                                                2758

pleadings are of utmost importance and anything, if found
missing in pleading, it may be fatal to such plea of adverse
possession. Since mere long possession cannot satisfy the
requirement of adverse possession, the person claiming it must
prove as to how and when the adverse possession commenced
and whether fact of adverse possession was known to real
owner. (R.N. Dawar Vs. Ganga Saran Dhama AIR 1993 Del.
19). In Parwatabai Vs. Sona Bai 1996 (10) SCC 266, it was
stressed upon by the Apex Court that to establish the claim of
adverse possession, one has to establish the exact date from
which adverse possession started. The claim based on adverse
possession has to be proved affirmatively by cogent evidence
and presumptions and probabilities cannot be substituted for
evidence. The plea of adverse possession is not always a legal
plea. It is always based on facts which must be asserted, pleaded
and proved. A person pleading adverse possession has no
equities in his favour since he is trying to defeat the right of the
true owner and, therefore, he has to specifically plead with
sufficient clarity when his possession became adverse and the
nature of such possession. (See Mahesh Chand Sharma Vs.
Raj Kumari Sharma AIR 1996 SC 869.
2890.       In Parsinnin Vs. Sukhi (1993) 4 SCC 375, it said
that burden of prove lies on the party who claims adverse
possession. He has to plead and prove that his possession is nec
vi, nec clam, nec precario i.e., peaceful, open and continuous.
2891.       Article 144 L.A. 1908 shows that where a suit for
possession is filed, it is the defendant to whom the plea of
adverse possession is available and it is he who has to take
necessary pleadings. A suit by a plaintiff based on adverse
possession is not contemplated by Article 144 inasmuch the suit
                                                              2759

contemplated therein is for restoration of possession and where
a person is already in possession, though adverse possession, the
question of filing a suit for possession would not arise. If the
chain of possession or continued possession ceased or
interrupted, particularly at the time of filing of the suit, the
adverse possession extinguishes and the earlier long possession,
may be of more than the statutory period, would not give any
advantage if the possession has been lost at the time of filing of
the suit.
2892.       Besides, alternative plea may be permissible, but
mutually destructive pleas are not permissible. The defendants
may raise inconsistent pleas so long as they are not mutually
destructive as held in Biswanath Agarwalla Vs. Sabitri Bera &
others JT 2009 (10) SC 538.
2893.       In Gautam Sarup Vs. Leela Jetly & others (2008)
7 SCC 85, the Court said that a defendant is entitled to take an
alternative plea but such alternative pleas, however, cannot be
mutually destructive of each other.
2894.       In Ejas Ali Qidwai and others (supra) certain
interesting questions cropped up which also attracted certain
consequences flowing from annexation of province of Oudh in
1857 by the British Government. It appears that one Asghar Ali
and his cousin Muzaffar Ali granted a mortgage by conditional
sale of the entire estate of Ambhapur (commonly known as the
Taluka of Gandara) and certain villages to the then Maharaja of
Balrampur. The mortgaged property situated in District
Bahraich, which was in the Province of Oudh. The mortgagee
brought an action to enforce his right, got a decree in his favour
and ultimately possession of the property in 1922. The sons of
Asghar Ali thereafter brought an action in civil court for
                                                               2760

recovery of their share of the mortgaged property on the ground
that it was the absolute property of their father and on his death
devolved on all the persons who were his heirs under the
Mahomedan Law. They challenged Iqbal Ali's right to mortgage
the whole of estate and impeached the mortgaged transaction on
various grounds. The claim was resisted on the ground that
succession to the estate was governed by the rule of
primogeniture according to which the whole of the estate
descended first to Asghar Ali and after his death his eldest son
Iqbal Ali. The defence having been upheld the claim was
negatived by the trial court as well as the court of appeal. Before
the Privy Council the only question raised was whether the
succession to the property was regulated by the rule of
primogeniture or by Mahomedan Law.
2895.       The Privy Council while considering the above
question observed that the Province of Oudh was annexed by
the East India Company in 1856 but in 1857 during the first war
of independence by native Indians much of its part was declared
independent. Soon after it was conquered by the British
Government and it got reoccupation of the entire province of
Oudh. Thereafter in March 1858 the British Government issued
a proclamation confiscating, with certain exceptions "the
proprietary right in the soil of the Province" and reserved to
itself the power to dispose of that right in such manner as to it
may seem fit. On 10th October 1859 the British Government
(the then Government of India) declared that every talukdar with
whom a summary settlement has been made since the re-
occupation of the Province has thereby acquired a permanent,
hereditary and transferable proprietary right, namely in the
taluka for which he has engaged, including the perpetual
                                                              2761

privilege of engaging with the Government for the revenue of
the taluka. Pursuant to that declaration, Wazir Ali with whom a
summary settlement of Taluka has already been made was
granted a Sanad which conferred upon him full proprietary
right, title and possession of the estate or Ambhapur. In the said
grant, there contained a stipulation that in the event of dying
intestate or anyone of his successor dies intestate, the estate
shall descend to the nearest male heir according to rule of
primogeniture. Subsequently, in order to avoid any further doubt
in the matter, Oudh Estates Act I of 1869 was enacted wherein
Wazir Ali was shown as a Tallukdar whose estate according to
the custome of the family on or before 13.2.1856 ordinarily
devolved upon a single heir. However, having noticed this state
of affairs, the Privy Council further observed that this rule was
not followed after the death of Wazir Ali and the Taluka was
mutated in favour of his cousin Nawazish Ali. He was recorded
as owner of Taluka. Thereafter in 1892 Samsam Ali entered the
joined possession with Nawazish Ali and after death of
Nawazish Ali, Samsam Ali was recorded as the sole owner. The
system of devolution of the property was explained being in
accordance with the usage of the family and when the name of
Asghar Ali was recorded, he also made a similar declaration.
Faced with the situation the appellant sought to explain the
possession of Nawazish Ali as adverse possession but the same
was discarded by the Privy Council observing:
      "The principle of law is firmly established that a person,
      who bases his title on adverse possession, must show by
      clear and unequivocal evidence that his possession was
      hostile to the real owner and amounted to a denial of his
      title to the property claimed."
                                                               2762

2896.         It appears that the plaintiffs initially sought to
maintain their claim of continued ownership, possession and
disruption against the Government authorities but later on the
plea of adverse possession against the defendant-Muslim parties
has been taken which makes the stand of the plaintiffs
inherently inconsistent and mutually destructive. The plaintiffs
ought to have elected one or the other case and could not have
taken a plea which is not an alternative but mutually destructive.
2897.         In Nagubai Ammal and others Vs. B. Shama Rao
and others, AIR 1956 SC 593 the Court considered the doctrine
of election and observed:
        "18. An admission is not conclusive as to the truth of the
        matters stated therein. It is only a piece of evidence, the
        weight to be attached to which must depend on the
        circumstances under which it is made. It can be shown to
        be erroneous or untrue, so long as the person to whom it
        was made has not acted upon it to his detriment, when it
        might become conclusive by way of estoppel.
              ........
              Reliance was placed on the well-known observations
        of Baron Park in Slatterie v. Pooley, (1840) 6 M & W 664
        (669) (C) that "what a party himself admits to be true may
        reasonably be presumed to be so", and on the decision in
        34 Ind App 27 (B), where this statement of the law was
        adopted. No exception can be taken to this proposition. But
        before it can be invoked, it must be shown that there is a
        clear and unambiguous statement by the opponent, such as
        will be conclusive unless explained."
        "The ground of the decision is that when on the same facts,
        a person has the right to claim one of two reliefs and with
                                                            2763

full knowledge he elects to claim one and obtains it, it is
not open to him thereafter to go back on his election and
claim the alternative relief. The principle was thus stated
by Bankes, L. J.:
"Having elected to treat the delivery to him as an
authorised delivery they cannot treat the same act as a
misdelivery. To do so would be to approbate and
reprobate the same act".
The observations of Scrutton, L. J. on which the appellants
rely are as follows :
"A plaintiff is not permitted to 'approbate and reprobate'.
The phrase is apparently borrowed from the Scotch law,
where it is used to express the principle embodied in our
doctrine of election- namely, that no party can accept and
reject the same instrument: Ker v. Wauchope (1819) 1
Bligh 1 (21) (E) : Douglas-Menzies v. Umphelby 1908 AC
224 (232) (F). The doctrine of election is not however
confined to instruments. A person cannot say at one time
that a transaction is valid and thereby obtain some
advantage, to which he could only be entitled on the footing
that it is valid, and then turn round and say it is void for the
purpose of securing some other advantage. That is to
approbate and reprobate the transaction".
It is clear from the above observations that the maxim that
a person cannot 'approbate and reprobate' is only one
application of the doctrine of election, and that its
operation must be confined to reliefs claimed in respect
of the same transaction and to the persons who are
parties thereto. The law is thus stated in Halsbury's Laws
of England, Volume XIII, page 454, para 512:
                                                                 2764

        "On the principle that a person may not approbate and
        reprobate, a species of estoppel has arisen which seems to
        be intermediate between estoppel by record and estoppel in
        pais, and may conveniently be referred to here. Thus a
        party cannot, after taking advantage under an order (e. g.
        payment of costs), be heard to say that it is invalid and ask
        to set it aside, or to set up to the prejudice of persons who
        have relied upon it a case inconsistent with that upon
        which it was founded; nor will he be allowed to go behind
        an order made in ignorance of the true facts to the
        prejudice of third parties who have acted on it". (para 23)
2898.         The Doctrine of election was described by Jarman
on Wills, 6th Edn. Page 532 as under :
        "The doctrine of election may be thus stated. That he who
        accepts a benefit under a deed or will must adopt the whole
        contents of the instrument conforming to all its provisions
        and renouncing every right inconsistent with it. It therefore
        a testator has affected to dispose of property which is not
        his own, and has given a benefit to the person to whom that
        property belongs, the devisee or legatees accepting the
        benefit so given to him must make good the testator's
        attempted disposition, but if, on the contrary, he choose to
        enforce his proprietary rights against the testator's
        disposition, equity will sequester the property given to him,
        for the purpose of making satisfaction out of it to the
        person whom he has disappointed by the assertion of those
        rights."
2899.         This has been followed in several cases noticed and
followed by a Division Bench of Madras High Court in
Ammalu Achi Vs. Ponnammal Achi & others AIR 1919
                                                               2765

Madras 464. The above judgment, however, shows that the
doctrine of election as followed therein was that of applicable in
England based on English decision since Sections 35 of Transfer
of Property Act, 1882 and 172 of Succession Act, 1865 were
found by the Court as enunciating the doctrine of election as
enforced in England but those sections were not applicable to
Hindus in India.
2900.        In R.N. Gosain Vs. Yashpal Dhir (supra), the Court
said:
        "10. Law does not permit a person to both approbate
        and reprobate. This principle is based on the doctrine of
        election which postulates that no party can accept and
        reject the same instrument and that "a person cannot say at
        one time that a transaction is valid any thereby obtain
        some advantage, to which he could only be entitled on the
        footing that it is valid, and then turn round and say it is
        void for the purpose of securing some other advantage".
        [See:Verschures Creameries Ltd. Vs. Hull and Netherlands
        Steamship Co. Ltd. (1921) KB 608, 612 (CA), Scrutton,
        LJ]. According to Halsbury's Laws of England, 4th Edn.,
        Vol. 16, "after taking an advantage under an order (for
        example for the payment of costs) a party may be precluded
        from saying that it is invalid and asking to set it aside".
        (para 1508).
2901.        In National Insurance Co. Ltd. Vs. Mastan (supra)
the Court said:
        "23. The 'doctrine of election' is a branch of 'rule of
        estoppel', in terms whereof a person may be precluded by
        his actions or conduct or silence when it is his duty to
        speak, from asserting a right which he otherwise would
                                                                 2766

        have had. The doctrine of election postulates that when
        two remedies are available for the same relief the
        aggrieved party has the option to elect either of them but
        not both. Although there are certain exceptions to the same
        rule but the same has no application in the instant case."
2902.         The question of effect of gap in continuous
possession came to be considered in Devi Singh Vs. Board of
Revenue for Rajasthan and others, (1994) 1 SCC 215 and in
para 5 the Court held as under:
        "The salutary principle of appreciation of evidence in
        possessory matters is that when a state of affairs is shown
        to have existed for a long course of time but a gap therein
        puts to doubt its continuity prudence requires to lean in
        favour of the continuity of things especially when some
        plausible explanation of the gap is forthcoming."
2903.         Since adverse possession is a plea to usurp title over
immovable property which otherwise the claimant does not
possess and its successful claim would mean that the real owner
shall be denuded of his title and the same would stand conferred
upon the claimant, the pleadings in this aspect, have been held
of utmost importance. They have to be very clear, emphatic and
to the extent of covering every necessary ingredient to satisfy
the claim of adverse possession. The claimant cannot take
advantage of default on the part of the other side but has to set
up his case on his own failing which it is he, who has to suffer.
Since this kind of claim has the result of defeating the very right
of an otherwise rightful person, the law is very strict on this
aspect. It needs a thorough and minute inquiry into the claim of
the person who asserts title on the basis of adverse possession.
2904.         In Abubakar Abdul Inamdar (supra) in the context
                                                                 2767

of Articles 64 and 65 of L.A. 1963 emphasizing the importance
of pleadings in para 5 of the judgment the Apex Court said :
              "With regard to the plea of adverse possession, the
        appellant having been successful in the two Courts below
        and not in the High Court, one has to turn to the pleadings
        of the appellant in his written statement. There he has
        pleaded a duration of his having remained in exclusive
        possession of the house, but nowhere has he pleaded a
        single overt act on the basis of which it could be inferred
        or ascertained that from a particular point of time his
        possession became hostile and notorious to the complete
        exclusion of other heirs, and his being in possession openly
        and hostilely. It is true that some evidence, basically of
        Municapal register entries, were inducted to prove the
        point but no amount of proof can substitute pleadings
        which are the foundation of the claim of a litigating party.
        The High Court cought the appellant right at that point and
        drawing inference from the evidence produced on record,
        concluded that correct principles relating to the plea of
        adverse possession were not applied by the courts below.
        The finding, as it appears to us, was rightly reversed by the
        High Court requiring no interference at our end." (Para 5)
2905.         In Ram Charan Das (supra) the property of a Mutt
was alienated by Mahant by executing a Mukararri (permanent
lease) in favour of one Munshi Naurangi Lal. The sale deed of
the land in dispute was also executed to another one and in both
the documents it was said that they were executed to meet the
expenses and necessities of the Mutt. After the death of Mahant,
a suit was filed by successor in office against the lessee and
purchaser etc. claiming possession of the property in dispute to
                                                                2768

Mutt. The defendants besides others, took the plea of adverse
possession also. The question was did the possession of the
concerned defendant became adverse to Mutt or Mahant
representing the Mutt on the date of relevant assurance or date
of death of the concerned Mahant. The trial court held the latter
date to be correct while the High Court took a contrary view and
upheld the former date. The Privy Council held:
        " In other words a mahant has power (apart from any
        question of necessity) to create an interest in property
        appertaining to the Mutt which will continue during his
        own life, or to put it perhaps more accurately, which will
        continue during his tenure of office of mahant of the mutt,
        with the result that adverse possession of the particular
        property will only commence when the mahant who had
        disposed of it ceases to be mahant by death or otherwise. If
        this be right as it must be taken to be, where the
        disposition by the mahant purports to be a grant of a
        permanent lease, their Lordships are unable to see why the
        position is not the same where the disposition purports to
        be an absolute grant of the property nor was any logical
        reason suggested in argument why there should be any
        difference between the two cases. In each case the
        operation of the purported grant is effective and endures
        only for the period during which the mahant had power to
        create an interest in the property of the mutt."
2906.         Recently, the Apex Court has considered in detail
the various authorities on the question of adverse possession in
Hemaji Waghaji Jat (supra) and in para 18 observed that plea
of adverse possession is not a pure question of law but a blended
one of fact and law. Therefore, a person who claims adverse
                                                                 2769

possession should show : (a) on what date he came into
possession, (b) what was the nature of his possession, (c)
whether the factum of possession was known to the other party,
(d) how long his possession has continued, and (e) his
possession was open and undisturbed. A person pleading
adverse possession has no equities in his favour. Since he is
trying to defeat the rights of the true owner, it is for him to
clearly plead and establish all facts necessary to establish his
adverse possession.
2907.         The Court also referred to its earlier decision in D.N.
Venkatarayappa (supra) observing :
              "Therefore, in the absence of crucial pleadings,
        which constitute adverse possession and evidence to show
        that the petitioners have been in continuous and
        uninterrupted possession of the lands in question claiming
        right, title and interest in the lands in question hostile to
        the right, title and interest of the original grantees, the
        petitioners cannot claim that they have perfected their title
        by adverse possession."
2908.         In D.N. Venkatarayappa (Supra), the Court
emphasized the importance of pleading as also the pre requisites
of plea of adverse possession and said :
              "3. ...What requires to be pleaded and proved is that
        the purchaser disclaimed his title under which he came into
        possession, set up adverse possession with necessary
        animus of asserting open and hostile title to the knowledge
        of the true owner and the later allowed the former, without
        any let or hindrance, to remain in possession and
        enjoyment of the property adverse to the interest of the true
        owner until the expiry of the prescribed period. The
                                                            2770

classical requirement of adverse possession is that it
should be nec vi, nec clam, nec precario."
      "... ordinary classical requirement of adverse
possession is that it should be nec vi, nec clam, nec
precario and the possession required must be adequate in
continuity, in publicity and in extent to show that it is
possession adverse to the competitor."
      "apart from the actual and continuous possession
which are among other ingredients of adverse possession,
there should be necessary animus on the part of the person
who intends to perfect his title by adverse possession."
      "A person who under the bona fide belief thinks that
the property belongs to him and as such he has been in
possession, such possession cannot at all be adverse
possession because it lacks necessary animus for perfecting
title by adverse possession."
      "... one of the important ingredients to claim adverse
possession is that the person who claims adverse
possession must have set up title hostile to the title of the
true owner."
      "...there is not even a whisper in the evidence of the
first petitioner with regard to the claim of adverse
possession set up by the petitioners. It is not stated by the
petitioners that they have been in continuous and
uninterrupted possession of the lands in question."
      "But, the crucial facts to constitute adverse
possession have not been pleaded. Admittedly, the
appellant came into possession by a derivative title from
the original grantee. It is seen that the original grantee has
no right to alienate the land. Therefore, having come into
                                                         2771

possession under colour of title from original grantee, if
the appellant intends to plead adverse possession as
against the State, he must disclaim his title and plead his
hostile claim to the knowledge of the State and that the
State had not taken any action thereon within the
prescribed period. Thereby, the appellant's possession
would become adverse. No such stand was taken nor
evidence has been adduced in this behalf. The counsel in
fairness, despite his research, is unable to bring to our
notice any such plea having been taken by the appellant."
      "Therefore, in the absence of crucial pleadings,
which constitute adverse possession and evidence to show
that the petitioners have been in continuous and
uninterrupted possession of the lands in question claiming
right, title and interest in the lands in question hostile to
the right, title and interest of the original grantees, the
petitioners cannot claim that they have perfected their title
by adverse possession"
      "...person, who comes into possession under colour
of title from the original grantee if he intends to claim
adverse possession as against the State, must disclaim his
title and plead his hostile claim to the knowledge of the
State and the State had not taken any action thereon within
the prescribed period."
      "5. ... in claiming adverse possession certain pleas
have to be made such as when there is a derivative title as
in the present case, if the appellants intend to plead
adverse possession as against the State, they must disclaim
their title and plead this hostile claim to the knowledge of
the State and that the State had not taken any action within
                                                                     2772

         the prescribed period, it is only in those circumstances the
         appellants' possession would become adverse. There is no
         material to that effect in the present case. Therefore, we
         are of the view that there is no substance in any of the
         contentions advanced on behalf of the appellants."
2909.          In Mahesh Chand Sharma (supra), the necessity of
pleading was emphasized and the Court in para 36 said :
               "In this connection, we may emphasise that a person
         pleading adverse possession has no equities in his favour.
         Since he is trying to defeat the rights of the true owner, it is
         for him to clearly plead and establish all the facts
         necessary to establish his adverse possession. For all the
         above reasons, the plea of limitation put forward by the
         appellant, or by Defendants Nos. 2 to 5 as the case may, be
         is rejected."
2910.          Here we may also refer to some more judgements
which have been cited by Sri P.N. Mishra, Advocate, advancing
his arguments on the issues pertaining to adverse possession.
2911.          In Smt. Bitola Kuer (supra) in para 16 the Court
said :
               "It is well settled that tile ordinarily carries with it
         the presumption of possession and that when the question
         arises is to who was in possession of land, the presumption
         is that the true owner was in such possession. In other
         word" possession follows title. The inevitable Corollary
         from this principle is that the burden lies on the person
         who claims to have acquired title by adverse possession to
         prove his case."
2912.          In Prabhu Narain Singh (supra) in para 6 the Court
observed :
                                                                 2773

              "A person claiming title to any land by adverse
        possession has to be very specific about the area of the
        land and the period over which he has been in possession."
2913.         In Ramzan Vs. Smt. Gafooran (supra) the Court
observed :
              "27.   It is, therefore, explicit that unless there is
        specific plea and proof that adverse possessor has
        disclaimed his right and asserted title and possession to the
        knowledge of the true owner within a statutory period and
        the true owner has acquiesced to it, the adverse possessor
        cannot succeed to have it established that he has perfected
        his right by prescription."
              "29. As pointed out above, where the defendants are
        not sure who is the true owner and question of their being
        in hostile possession then the question of denying title of
        true owner does not arise. At the most, the defendants have
        claimed and which is found to be correct by the trial court
        that they have been in possession of the disputed property
        since the inception of the sale deeds in their favour. They
        came in possession, according to their showing, as owner
        of the property in question. It follows that they exercised
        their right over the disputed property as owner and
        exercise of such right, by no stretch of imagination, it can
        be said that they claimed their title adverse to the true
        owner."
2914.         In Raja Rajgan Maharaja Jagatjit Singh (supra) it
was held that the defendant-appellant has to establish that the
title to the land in suit held by the owner under the First
Settlement of 1865 had been extinguished under Section 28 of
the Limitation Act due to the adverse possession of the
                                                                 2774

defendant-appellant or his predecessors for the appropriate
statutory period of limitation and completed prior to the
possession taken under attachment by Tehsildar who thereafter
held it for the true owner. It also says:
        "It is well established that adverse possession against an
        existing title must be actual and cannot be constructive."
2915.         In Md. Mohammad Ali Vs. Jagdish Kalita (supra)
also the change brought in 1963 under Article 65 qua the earlier
Act of 1908 was pointed out and the Court observed:
              "By reason of the Limitation Act, 1963 the legal
        position as was obtaining under the old Act underwent a
        change. In a suit governed by Article 65 of the 1963
        Limitation Act, the plaintiff will succeed if he proves his
        title and it would no longer be necessary for him to prove,
        unlike in a suit governed by Articles 142 and 144 of the
        Limitation Act, 1908, that he was in possession within 12
        years preceding the filing of the suit. On the contrary, it
        would be for the defendant so to prove if he wants to
        defeat the plaintiffs claim to establish his title by adverse
        possession."
2916.      Mahadeo Prasad Singh and others Vs. Karia
Bharthi, AIR 1935 PC 44 is a judgment which deals with the
issue of commencement of limitation under Article 144 of
Limitation Act 1908. It was held therein that a person in actual
possession of Math is entitled to maintain a suit of recovery of
property pertaining to Math not for his own benefit but for the
benefit of Math. On the matter of limitation the Court held:
              "It is common ground that the article of the Indian
        Limitation Act of 1908 applicable to the claim is Article
        144, which prescribes a period of 12 years from the date
                                                                   2775

        when the possession of the appellants became adverse to
        the math. Their case is that in 1904, when Rajbans settled
        his dispute with the plaintiff, he ceased to be the mahant of
        Kanchanpur and repudiated the title of the math of the
        village of Saktni as well as to the other villages which he
        got in pursuance of the compromise. On that date, it is
        contended, he began to hold the property adversely to the
        institution, and the action, which was brought after the
        expiry of 12 years from that date, was barred by time."
2917.        To the same effect is the view taken in Gopal Datt
Vs. Babu Ram, AIR 1936 All 653.
2918.         From the above discussion what boils down is that
the concept of adverse possession contemplates a hostile
possession, i.e., a possession which is expressly or impliedly in
denial of the title of the true owner. Possession to be adverse
must be possession by a person who does not acknowledge the
other's right and in fact deny the same. A person who bases his
title on adverse possession must show by clear and unequivocal
evidence that his possession was hostile to the real owner and
amounted to denial of his title to the property claimed. In order
to determine whether the act of a person constitute adverse
possession is 'animus in doing that act' and it is most crucial
factor. Adverse possession commenced in wrong and is aimed
against right. A person is said to hold the property adversely to
the real owner when that person in denial of owner's right
excluded him from the enjoyment of his property. Adverse
possession is that form of possession or occupancy of land
which is inconsistent with the title of the rightful owner and
tends to extinguish that person's title. Possession is not held to
be adverse if it can be referred to a lawful title. The persons
                                                                  2776

setting up adverse possession may have been holding under the
rightful owner's title, i.e., trustees, guardians, bailiffs or agents,
such person cannot set up adverse possession. Burden is on the
defendant to prove affirmatively.
2919.        An occupation of reality is inconsistent with the
right of the true owner. Where a person possesses property in a
manner in which he is not entitled to possess it, and without
anything to show that he possesses it otherwise than an owner,
i.e., with the intention of excluding all persons from it, including
the rightful owner, he is in adverse possession of it. Where
possession could be referred to a lawful title it shall not be
considered to be adverse. The reason be is that a person whose
possession can be referred to a lawful title will not be permitted
to show that his possession was hostile to another's title. One
who holds possession on behalf of another does not by mere
denial of other's title make his possession adverse so as to give
himself the benefit of the statute of limitation. A person who
enters into possession having a lawful title cannot divest another
of that title by pretending that he had no title at all.
2920.        Adverse possession is of two kinds. (A) Adverse
from the beginning or (B) that become so subsequently. If a
mere trespasser takes possession of A's property, and retains it
against him, his possession is adverse ab initio. But if A grants a
lease of land to B, or B obtains possession of the land as A's
bailiff, or guardian, or trustee, his possession can only become
adverse by some change in his position. Adverse possession not
only entitled the adverse possessor, like every other possessor,
to be protected in his possession against all who cannot show a
better title, but also, if the adverse possessor remains in
possession for a certain period of time produces the effect either
                                                                2777

of barring the right of the true owner, and thus converting the
possessor into the owner, or of depriving the true owner of his
right of action to recover his property although the true owner is
ignorant of the adverse possessor being in occupation.
2921.         In Hari Chand Vs. Daulat Ram (supra) the Court
held if the encroachment was not new one but the structure was
in existence prior to acquiring title over the property the decree
on the basis of adverse possession cannot be granted in favour
of the plaintiff. Para 10 and 11 of the judgment reads as under:
        "10. On a consideration of these evidences it is quite clear
        that the disputed kachha wall and the khaprail over it is
        not a new construction, but existed for over 28 years and
        the defendant has been living therein as has been deposed
        to by Ramji Lal vendor of the plaintiff who admitted in his
        evidence that the land in dispute and the adjoining kachha
        walls had been affected by salt and the chhappar over the
        portion shown in red was tiled roof constructed about 28
        years back. This is also supported by the evidence of the
        defendant, D.W. 1, that the wall in dispute was in existence
        when the partition was effected i.e., 28 years before. On a
        consideration of these evidences the Trial Court rightly
        held that the defendant had not trespassed over the land in
        question nor he had constructed a new wall or khaprail.
        The trial court also considered the report 57C by the court
        Amin and held that the wall in question was not a recent
        construction but it appeared 25-30 years old in its present
        condition as (is) evident from the said report. The suit was
        therefore dismissed. The lower appellate court merely
        considered the partition deed and map Exts. 3/1 and 3/2
        respectively and held that the disputed property fell to the
                                                         2778

share of the plaintiff's vendor and the correctness of the
partition map was not challenged in the written statement.
The court of appeal below also referred to Amin's map 47
A which showed the encroached portion in red colour as
falling within the share of plaintiff's vendor, and held that
the defendant encroached on this portion of land marked in
red colour, without at all considering the clear evidence of
the defendant himself that the wall and the khaprail in
question existed for the last 28 years and the defendant
has been living there all along. P.W. 1 Ramji Lal himself
also admitted that the wall existed for about 28 years as
stated by the defendant and the kachha walls and the
khaprail has been effected by salt. The lower appellate
court though held that P.W. 1 Ramji Lal admitted in
cross-examination that towards the north of the land in
dispute was the khaprail covered room of Daulat Ram in
which Daulat Ram lived, but this does not mean that the
wall in dispute exists for the last any certain number of
years, although it can be said that it is not a recent
construction. Without considering        the deposition of
defendant No. 1 as well as the report of the Amin 57 C the
IInd Addl. Civil Judge, Agra wrongly held that the
defendant failed to prove that the wall in dispute and the
khaprail existed for the last more than 12 years before the
suit. The Civil Judge further held on surmises as "may be
that the wall and khaprail have not been raised in May,
1961 as is the plaintiff's case, but they are recent
constructions." This decision of the court of appeal below
is wholly incorrect being contrary to the evidences on
record."
                                                                    2779

        "11.       On a consideration of all the evidences on record it
        is clearly established that the alleged encroachment by
        construction of kuchha wall and khaprail over it are not a
        recent construction as alleged to have been made in May
        1961. On the other hand, it is crystal clear from the
        evidences of Ramji Lal P.W. 1 and Daulat Ram D.W. 1 that
        the disputed wall with khaprail existed there in the disputed
        site for a long time, that is 28 years before and the wall
        and the khaprail have been affected by salt as deposed to
        by these two witnesses. Moreover the court Amin's report
        57 C also shows the said walls and khaprail to be 25-30
        years old in its present condition. The High Court has
        clearly came to the finding that though the partition deed
        was executed by the parties yet there was no partition by
        metes and bounds. Moreover there is no whisper in the
        plaint about the partition of the property in question
        between the co-sharers by metes and bounds nor there is
        any averment that the suit property fell to the share of
        plaintiff's vendor Ramji Lal and Ramji Lal was ever in
        possession of the disputed property since the date of
        partition till the date of sale to the plaintiff. The plaintiff
        has singularly failed to prove his case as pleaded in the
        plaint."
2922.           In Maharaja Sir Kesho Prasad Singh Bahadur
(supra) the Hon'ble Privy Council has held that mere receipt of
rent by persons claiming adversely is not sufficeint to warrant
finding of adverse possession. The possession of persons or
their predecessors-in-title claiming by adverse possession must
have     "all      the   qualities   of   adequacy,   continuity   and
exclusiveness" necessary to displace the title of the persons
                                                                   2780

against whom they claim. Relevant extracts from page 78 of the
said judgment reads as follows:
        "the mere fact that many years after the sale the
        Gangbarar maliks or persons depriving title from them are
        obtaining rent for the land is in itself very significant. Even
        in a locality exposed to dilution by the action of the river
        this circumstance alone might be given considerable
        weight. But without sufficient proof to cover the intervening
        years it was most reasonably held by the learned
        Subordinate Judge to be insufficient. The circumstance that
        the Maharaja was not in possession or in receipt of rent is,
        it need hardly be said, insufficient under Art. 144 to
        warrant a finding of adverse possession on behalf of the
        respondents or their predecessors-in-title. Their Lordships
        are of opinion that on the materials produced it cannot be
        contended that the learned Subordinate Judge was obliged
        in law to find that the possession of the principal
        respondents had "all the qualities of adequacy, continuity
        and exclusiveness" (per Lord Shaw 126 CWN 66610 at p.
        673) necessary to displace the title of the Maharaja, and
        they think that no reason in law exists why his finding of
        fact in this respect should not be final."
2923.         In Ramzan and others Vs. Smt. Gafooran (supra)
the Hon'ble Allahabad High Court has held that unless there is
specific plea and proof that adverse possession has disclaimed
his right and asserted title and possession to the knowledge of
the true owner within the statutory period and the true owner has
acquiesced to it, the adverse possessor cannot succeed to have it
established that he has perfected his right by prescription.
Where the adverse possessor were not sure as to who was the
                                                                 2781

true owner and question of their being in hostile possession,
then the question of denying title of true owner does not arise.
Relevant paras 27, 29 and 30 of the said judgment read as
follows:
        "27. It is, therefore, explicit that unless there is specific
        plea and proof that adverse possessor has disclaimed his
        right and asserted title and possession to the knowledge of
        the true owner within a statutory period and the true owner
        has acquiesced to it, the adverse possessor cannot succeed
        to have it established that he has perfected his right by
        prescription."
        "29. As pointed out above, where the defendants are not
        sure who is the true owner and question of their being in
        hostile possession then the question of denying title of true
        owner does not arise. At the most, the defendants have
        claimed and which is found to be correct by the trial court
        that they have been in possession of the disputed property
        since the inception of the sale deeds in their favour. They
        came in possession, according to their showing, as owner
        of the property in question. It follows that they exercised
        their right over the disputed property as owner and
        exercise of such right, by no stretch of imagination, it can
        be said that they claimed their title adverse to the true
        owner."
        "30. Viewed as above, on the facts of the present case, the
        possession of the contesting defendants is not of the variety
        and degree which is required for adverse possession to
        materialise."
2924.         In Qadir Bux Vs. Ramchand (supra) the Hon'ble
Allahabad High Court has held that the term "dispossession"
                                                               2782

applies when a person comes in and drives out others from the
possession. It implies ouster; a driven out of possession against
the will of the person in actual possession. The term
"discontinuance" implies a voluntary act and openness of
possession followed by the actual possession of another. It
implies that a person discontinuing as owner of the land and left
it to be dispossessed by any one who has not to come in.
Relevant para 30 of the said judgment reads as follows:
     "30. The main point for consideration is whether in such
     circumstances it can be said that the plaintiff had been
     dispossessed or had discontinued his possession within the
     meaning of Article 142 of the First Schedule to the Indian
     Limitation Act. The term "dispossession" applies when a
     person comes in and drives out others from the possession.
     It imports ouster: a driving out of possession against the
     will of the person in actual possession. This driving out
     cannot be said to have occurred when according to the
     case of the plaintiff the transfer of possession was
     voluntary, that is to say, not against the will of the person
     in possession but in accordance with his wishes and active
     consent. The term "discontinuance" implies a voluntary act
     and abandonment of possession followed by the actual
     possession of another. It implies that the person
     discontinuing has given up the land and left it to be
     possessed by anyone choosing to come in. There must be
     an intention to abandon title before there can be said to be
     a discontinuance in possession, but this cannot be assumed.
     It must be either admitted or proved. So strong in fact is the
     position of the rightful owner that even when he has been
     dispossessed by a trespasser and that trespasser abandons
                                                                   2783

        possession either voluntarily or by vis major for howsoever
        short a time before he has actually perfected his tittle by
        twelve years' adverse possession the possession of the true
        owner is deemed to have revived and he gets a fresh
        starting point of limitation - vide Gurbinder Singh v. Lal
        Singh, AIR 1965 SC 1553. Wrongful possession cannot be
        assumed against the true owner when according to the
        facts disclosed by him he himself had voluntarily handed
        over possession and was not deprived of it by the other
        side."
2925.            In Gurbinder Singh and another Vs. Lal Singh
and another, AIR 1965 SC 1553 the Hon'ble Supreme Court
held that in an order that Article 142 is attracted the plaintiff
must initially found in possession of the property and should
have been dispossessed by the defendant or someone through
whom the defendants claim or alternatively the plaintiff should
have discontinued possession. It has also been held that in a suit
to which Article 144 attracted the burden is on the party who
claims adverse possession to establish that he was in adverse
possession for 12 years before the date of suit and for
computation of this period he can avail of the adverse
possession of any person or persons through whom he claims
but not the adverse possession of an independent trespasser.
Relevant paras 6, 8 and 10 of the said judgment read as follows:
        "6.      In order that Art. 142 is attracted the plaintiff must
        initially have been in possession of the property and should
        have been dispossessed by the defendant or someone
        through whom the defendants claim or alternatively the
        plaintiff should have discontinued possession. It is no one's
                 case that Lal Singh ever was in possession of the
                                                          2784

property. It is true that Pratap Singh was in possession of
part of the property--which particular part we do not
know--by reason of a transfer thereof in his favour by
Bakshi Singh. In the present     suit both Lal Singh and
Pratap Singh assert their claim to property by success on
in accordance with the rules contained in the dastur ul
amal whereas the possession of Pratap Singh for some
time was under a different title altogether. So far as the
present       suit is concerned it must, therefore, be said
that the plaintiffs--respondents were never in possession
as heirs of Raj Kaur and consequently art. 142 would not
be attracted to their suit."
"8.   Mr. Tarachand Brijmohanlal, however, advanced an
interesting argument to the effect that if persons entitled to
immediate possession of land are somehow kept out of
possession may be by different trespassers for a period of
12 years or over, their suit will be barred by time. He
points out that as from the death of Raj Kaur her
daughters, through one of whom the respondents claim,
were kept out of possession by trespassers and that from
the date of Raj Kaur's death right up to the date of the
respondents' suit, that is, for a period of nearly 20 years
      trespassers were in possession of Mahan Kaur's, and
after her death, the respondents' share in the land, their
suit must therefore be regarded as barred by time. In other
words the learned counsel wants to tack on the adverse
possession    of   Bakshi Singh and Pratap Singh to the
adverse possession of the Raja and         those who claim
through him. In support of the contention reliance          is
placed by learned counsel on the decision in Ramayya v.
                                                          2785

Kotamma, ILR 45 Mad 370: (AIR 1922 Mad 59). In order
to appreciate what was decided in that case a brief resume
of the facts of that case is necessary. Mallabattudu, the last
male holder of the properties to which the suit related, died
in the year 1889 leaving two daughters Ramamma and
Govindamma. The former died in 1914. The latter
surrendered her estate to her two sons. The plaintiff who
was a transferee from the sons of Govindamma instituted
a suit for recovery      of possession of Mallabattudu's
property against Punnayya, the son of Ramamma to whom
Mallabattudu had made an oral gift of his properties two
years before his death. Punnayya was minor at the date of
gift and his eider brother Subbarayudu was managing the
property on his behalf. Punnayya, however, died in 1894
while still a minor and thereafter his brothers Subbarayudu
and two others were in possession of the property. It
would seem that the other brothers died and Subbarayudu
was the last surviving member of Punnayya's family.
Upon Subbarayudu's death the properties were sold by his
daughters to the third defendant. The plaintiffs- appellants
suit failed on the ground of limitation. It was argued on his
behalf in the second appeal before the High Court that as
the gift to Punnayya was oral it was invalid, that
consequently Punnayya was in possession as trespasser,
that on Punnayya's death his heir would be his mother, that
as Subbarayudu continued in possession Subbarayudu's
possession was also that of a trespasser, that as neither
Subbarayudu nor Punnayya completed possession for 12
years they could not tack on one to the other and that the
plaintiff claiming through the nearest reversioner is not
                                                            2786

barred. The contention for the respondents was that there
was no break in possession so as to retest the properties in
the original owners, that Punnayya and Subbarayudu
cannot be treated as successive trespassers and that in any
event the real owner having been out of possession for
over 12 years the suit was barred by limitation. The High
Court following the decision of Mookerjee J. in Mohendra
Nath v. Shamsunnessa, 21 Cal. LJ 157 at p. 164:(AIR 1915
Cal. 629 at p. 633), held that time begins to run against the
lastfull owner if he himself was dispossessed and the
operation of the law of limitation would not be arrested by
the fact that on his death he was succeeded by his widow,
daughter or mother, as the cause of action cannot be
prolonged    by the mere     transfer of     title.   It may be
mentioned that as Mallabattudu had given up possession
to Punnayya     under an invalid      gift    Art. 142 of the
Limitation Act was clearly attracted. The sons of
Govindamma from whom the appellant had purchased the
suit properties claimed through Mallabattudu and since
time began     to   run against him from 1887 when           he
discontinued possession it did not cease to run by the mere
fact of his death. In a suit to which that Article applies the
plaintiff has to prove his possession within 12 years of his
suit. Therefore, so long as the total period of the plaintiff's
exclusion from possession is, at the date of the plaintiff's
suit, for a period of 12 years or over, the fact that this
exclusion was by different trespassers will not help the
plaintiff provided there was a continuity in the period of
exclusion. That decision is not applicable to the facts of the
case before us. This is a suit to which Art. 144 is
                                                           2787

attracted and the burden is on the defendant to establish
that he was in adverse possession for 12 years before the
date of suit and for computation of this period he can avail
of the adverse possession of any person or persons
through whom he claims--but not the adverse possession of
independent trespassers."
"10. This view has not been departed from in any case. At
any rate none was brought to our notice where it has not
been followed. Apart from that what we are concerned with
is the language used by the legislature in the third column
of Art. 144. The starting point of limitation there stated is
the date when the possession of the defendant becomes
adverse to the plaintiff. The word "defendant" is defined in
S. 2(4) of the Limitation Act thus:
'defendant' includes any person from or through whom a
defendant derives his liability to be sued".
No doubt, this is an inclusive definition but the gist of it is
the existence of a jural relationship between different
persons. There can be no jural relationship       between
two independent trespassers. Therefore, where a defendant
in possession of property is sued by a person who has title
to it but is out of possession what he has to show in
defence is that he or anyone through whom he claims has
been in possession for more than the statutory period. An
independent trespasser not being such a person the
defendant is not entitled to tack on the previous possession
of that person to his own possession. In our opinion,
therefore, the respondents' suit is within time and has
been rightly decreed       by the courts below. We dismiss
this appeal with costs."
                                                                2788

2926.         In S.M. Karim Vs. Mst Bibi Sakina (supra) the
Hon'ble Apex Court has held that the alternative claim must be
clearly made and proved, adverse possession must be adequate
in continuity, in publicity and extent and a plea is required at the
least to show when possession becomes adverse so that the
starting point on limitation against the party affected can be
found. A mere suggestion in the relief clause that there was an
uninterrupted possession for "several 12 years" or that the
plaintiff had acquired "a possible title" was not enough to raise
such a plea. Long possession is not necessary adverse
possession and prayer clause is not a substitute for a plea.
Relevant paras 3 to 5 of the said judgment read as follows:
        "3.   In this appeal, it has been stressed by the appellant
        that the findings clearly establish the benami nature of the
        transaction of 1914. This is, perhaps, true but the
        appellant cannot avail himself of it. The appellant's claim
        based upon the benami nature of the transaction cannot
        stand because S. 66 of the Code of Civil Procedure bars it.
        That section provides that no suit shall be maintained
        against any person claiming title under a purchase
        certified by the Court on the ground that the purchase was
        made on behalf of the plaintiff or on behalf of someone
        through whom the plaintiff claims. Formerly, the opening
        words were, no suit shall be maintained against a certified
        purchaser and the change was made to protect not only the
        certified purchaser but any person claiming title under a
        purchase certified by the Court. The protection is thus
        available not only against the real purchaser but also
        against anyone claiming through him. In the present case,
        the appellant as plaintiff was hit by the section and the
                                                          2789

defendants were protected by it."
"4.   It is contended that the case falls within the second
sub-section under which a suit is possible at the instance of
a third    person    who wishes to proceed against the
property, though ostensibly sold to the certified purchaser,
on tie ground that it is liable to satisfy a claim of such
third person against the real owner. Reliance is placed
upon the transfer by Syed Aulad Ali in favour of the
appellant which is described as a claim by the transferee
against the real owner. The words of the second sub-
section refer to the claim of creditors and not to the
claims of transferees. The latter are dealt with in first sub-
section, and if the meaning sought to be placed on the
second sub-section by the appellant were to be accepted,
the entire policy of the law would be defeated by the real
purchaser making a transfer to another and the first sub-
section would become almost a dead letter. In our opinion,
such a construction cannot be accepted and the plaintiff's
suit must be held to be barred under S. 66 of the Code."
"5.   As an alternative, it was contended before us that the
title of   Hakir Alam was extinguished by long and
uninterrupted adverse possession of Syed Aulad Ali and
after him of the plaintiff. The High Court did not accept
this case. Such a case is, of course, open to a plaintiff to
make if his possession is disturbed. If the possession of the
real owner ripens into title under the Limitation Act and he
is dispossessed, he can sue to obtain possession, for he
does not then rely on the benami nature of the transaction.
But the alternative claim must be         clearly made and
proved. The High Court held that the plea of adverse
                                                         2790

possession was not raised in the suit and reversed the
decision of the two courts below. The plea of adverse
possession is raised here. Reliance is placed before us on
Sukan v. Krishanand, ILR 32 Pat 353 and Sri Bhagwan
Singh and others v. Ram Basi Kuer and others, AIR 1957
Pat 157 to submit that such a plea is not necessary and
alternatively, that if a plea is required, what can be
considered a proper plea. But these two cases can hardly
help the appellant. No doubt, the plaint sets out the fact
that after the purchase by Syed Aulad Ali, benami in the
name of    his son-in-law Hakir Alam Ali continued in
possession of the property but it does not say that this
possession was at any time adverse to that of the certified
purchaser. Hakir Alam was the son-in-law of Syed Aulad
Ali and was living with him. There is no suggestion that
Syed Aulad Ali ever asserted any hostile title against him
or that a dispute with regard to ownership and possession
had ever arisen. Adverse possession must be adequate in
continuity, in publicity and extent and a plea is required at
the least to show when possession becomes adverse so that
the starting point of limitation against the party affected
can be found. There is no evidence here when possession
became adverse, if it at all did, and a    mere suggestion
in the relief clause that there was an         uninterrupted
possession for "several 12 years" or that the plaintiff had
acquired "an absolute title" was not enough to raise such a
plea. Long possession is not necessarily adverse possession
and the prayer clause is not a substitute for a plea. The
cited cases need hardly be considered, because each case
must be determined upon the allegations in the plaint in
                                                                 2791

        that case. It is sufficient to point out that in Bishun Dayal
        v. Kesho Prasad, A.I.R. 1940 P.C. 202 the           Judicial
        Committee did not accept an alternative case based on
        possession after purchase without a proper plea."
2927.         In B. Leelavathi Vs. Honamma (supra) the Hon'ble
Supreme Court has held that the adverse possession is a
question of fact which has to be specifically pleaded and proved
and in the absence of any plea of adverse possession, framing of
an issue and adducing evidence could not held that the plaintiffs
had perfected towards the title by way of adverse possession.
Paras 11 of the judgment read as follows:
        "11. Plea of adverse possession had been taken vaguely in
        the plaint. No categorical stand on this point was taken in
        the plaint. No issue had been framed and seemingly the
        same was not insisted upon by the plaintiff-respondent.
        Adverse possession is a question of fact which has to be
        specifically pleaded and proved. No evidence was adduced
        by the plaintiff-respondent with regard to adverse
        possession. Honnamma, the plaintiff in her own statement
        did not say that she is in adverse possession of the suit
        property. We fail to understand as to how the High Court,
        in the absence of any plea of adverse possession, framing
        of an issue and evidence led on the point, could hold that
        the plaintiff-respondent had perfected her title by way of
        adverse possession."
2928.         In Dharamarajan Vs. Valliammal (supra) the
Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that in a claim of adverse
possession openness and adverse nature of the possession has to
be proved against the owner of the property in question.
Relevant para 11 of the said judgment reads as follows:
                                                           2792

"11. In our opinion none of these questions could be said
to be either question of law or a substantial question of law
arising out of the pleadings of the parties. The first referred
question of law could not and did not arise for the simple
reason that the plea of adverse possession has been rightly
found against the plaintiff. Karupayee Ammal's possession,
even if presumed to be in a valid possession in law, could
not be said to be adverse possession as throughout it was
the case of the appellant Dharmarajan that it was a
permissive possession and that she was permitted to stay
on the land belonging to the members of the Iyer family.
Secondly it has nowhere come as to against whom was her
possession adverse. Was it adverse against the Government
or against the Iyer family? In order to substantiate the plea
of adverse possession, the possession has to be open and
adverse to the owner of the property in question. The
evidence did not show this openness and adverse nature
because it is not even certain as to against whom the
adverse possession was pleaded on the part of Karupayee
Ammal.       Further even the legal relationship of
Doraiswamy and Karupayee Ammal is not pleaded or
proved.    All that is pleaded is that after Karupayee
Ammal's demise Doraiswamy as her foster son continued in
the thatched shed allegedly constructed by Karupayee
Ammal. There was no question of the tacking of possession
as there is ample evidence on record to suggest that
Doraiswamy also was in the service of Iyer family and that
he was permitted to stay after Karupayee Ammal. Further
his legal heirship was also not decisively proved. We do
not, therefore, see as to how the first substantial question of
                                                                2793

        law came to be framed. This is apart from the fact that
        ultimately High Court has not granted the relief to the
        respondents on the basis of the finding of this question. On
        the other hand the High Court has gone into entirely
        different consideration based on reappreciation of
        evidence.   The second and third questions are not the
        questions of law at all. They are regarding appreciation of
        evidence. The fourth question is regarding the admissibility
        of Exhibit A-8. In our opinion there is no question of
        admissibility as the High Court has found that Exhibit A-8
        was not admissible in evidence since the Tehsildar who had
        issued that certificate was not examined. Therefore, there
        will be no question of admissibility since the document
        itself was not proved. Again the finding of the High Court
        goes against the respondent herein. Even the fifth question
        was a clear cut question of fact and was, therefore,
        impermissible in the Second Appeal."
2929.         In A.S. Vidyasagar (supra) the Hon'ble Supreme
Court has held that permissive possession is not adverse
possession and can be terminated at any time by the rightful
owner. Relevant para 5 of the judgment reads as follows:
        "5.   Adverse possession is sought to be established on the
        supposition that Kanthimathi got possession of the
        premises as a licensee and on her death in 1948, the
        appellant who was 4 years of age, must be presumed to
        have become a trespasser. And if he had remained in
        trespass for 12 years, the title stood perfected and in any
        case, a suit to recovery of possession would by then be
        time-barred. We are unable to appreciate this line of
        reasoning for it appears to us that there is no occasion to
                                                                 2794

        term the possession of Kanthimathi as that of a licensee.
        The possession was permissive in her hands and remained
        permissive in the hands of the appellant on his birth, as
        well as in the hands of his father living then with
        Kanthimathi. There was no occasion for any such licence
        to have been terminated. For the view we are taking there
        was no licence at all. Permissible possession of the
        appellant could rightfully be terminated at any moment by
        the rightful owners. The present contesting respondents
        thus had a right to institute the suit for possession against
        the appellant. No oral evidence has been referred to us
        which would go to support the plea of openness, hostility
        and notoriety which would go to establish adverse
        possession. On the contrary, the Municipal Tax receipts,
        Exts. B-39 and 40, even though suggestedly reflecting
        payment made by the appellant, were in the name of
        Kuppuswami, the rightful owner. This negates the assertion
        that at any stage did the appellant assert a hostile title.
        Even by examining the evidence, at our end, we come to the
        same view as that of the High Court. The plea of adverse
        possession thus also fails. As a result fails this appeal.
        Accordingly, we dismiss the appeal, but without any order
        as to costs."
2930.         In Goswami Shri Mahalaxmi Vahuji Vs. Shah
Ranchhoddas Kalidas, AIR 1970 SC 2025 the Hon'ble
Supreme Court held that a party cannot be allowed to set up a
case wholly inconsistent with that pleaded in there written
statement. Relevant para 8 of the said judgment reads as
follows:
        "8.   We may now proceed to examine the material on
                                                          2795

record for finding out 'the true character of the suit
properties viz. whether they are properties of a public trust
arising from their dedication of those properties in favour
of the deity Shree Gokulnathji or whether the deity as
well as the suit properties are the private properties of
Goswami Maharaj. In her written statement as noticed,
earlier, the Ist defendant took up the specific plea that the
idol of Shree Gokulnathji is the private property of the
Maharaj the Vallabh Cult does not permit any dedication
in favour of an idol and in fact there was no dedication in
favour of that idol. She emphatically denied that the suit
properties were the properties of the deity Gokulnathji but
in this Court evidently because of the enormity of evidence
adduced by the plaintiffs, a totally new plea was taken
namely that several items of the suit properties had been
dedicated to Gokulnathji but the deity being the family
deity of the Maharaj, the resulting trust is only a private
trust. In other words the plea taken in the written statement
is that the suit properties were the private properties of the
Maharaj and that there was no trust, private or public. But
the case argued before this Court is a wholly different one
viz., the suit properties were partly the properties of a
private trust and partly the private properties of the
Maharaj. The Ist defendant cannot be permitted to take up
a case which is wholly inconsistent with that pleaded. This
belated attempt to bypass the evidence adduced appears to
be more a manor than a genuine explanation of the
documentary evidence adduced. It is amply proved that
ever since Mathuranathji took over the management of the
shrine, two sets of account books have been maintained,
                                                          2796

one relating to the income and expenses of the shrine and
the other relating to that of the Maharaj. These account
books and other documents show that presents and gifts
used to. be made to the deity as well as to the Maharaj. The
two were quite separate and distinct. Maharaj himself has
been making gifts to the deity. He has been, at times
utilising the funds belonging to. the deity and thereafter
reimbursing the same. The account books which have been
produced clearly go to show that the deity and the Maharaj
were treated as two different and distinct legal entities. The
evidence afforded "by the account books is tell-tale. In the
trial court it was contended on behalf of the Ist defendant
that none of the account books produced relate exclusively
to the affairs of the temple. They all record the transactions
of the Maharaj, whether pertaining to his personal
dealings or dealings in connection with the deity. This is an
obviously untenable contention. That contention was given
up in the High Court. In the High Court it was urged that
two sets of account books were kept, one relating to the
income and expenditure of the deity and the other of the
Maharai so that the Maharai could easily find out-his
financial commitments relating to the affairs of the deity.
But in this Court Mr. Narasaraju, learned Counsel for the
appellant realising the untenability of the contention
advanced in the courts below presented for our
consideration a totally new case and that is that
Gokulnathji undoubtedly is a legal personality; in the past
the properties had been dedicated in favour of that deity;
those properties are the properties of a private trust of
which the Maharaj was the trustee. On the basis of this
                                                                 2797

        newly evolved theory he wanted to explain away the effect
        of the evidence afforded by the account books and the
        documents. We are unable to accept this new plea. It runs
        counter to the case pleaded in the written statement. This is
        not a purely legal contention. The Ist defendant must have
        known whether there was any dedication in favour of Shri
        Gokulnathji and whether any         portion    of   the suit
        properties were the properties of a private trust. She and
        her adviser's must have known at all relevant times the true
        nature of the accounts maintained. Mr. Narasaraju is not
        right in his contention that the plea taken by him in this
        Court is a purely legal plea. It essentially relates to
        questions of fact. Hence we informed Mr. Narasaraju that
        we will not entertain the plea in question."
2931.         In the matter of plea of adverse possession, mutually
inconsistent or mutually destructive pleas must not be taken in
the plaint. Whenever the plea of adverse possession is raised, it
pre supposes that onwer is someone else and the person taking
the plea of adverse possession is not the actual owner but has
perfected his title by prescription since the real owner failed to
initiate any proceeding for restoring the possession within the
prescribed period under the statute.
2932.         In P Periasami Vs. P Periathambi (supra) it was
said:
        "Whenever the plea of adverse possession is projected,
        inherent in the plea is that someone else was the owner of
        the property."
2933.         In Mohan Lal v. Mirza Abdul Gaffar (1996) 1SCC
639, the Court said"
              "As regards the first plea, it is inconsistent with the
                                                                   2798

        second plea. Having come into possession under the
        agreement, he must disclaim his right thereunder and plead
        and prove assertion of his independent hostile adverse
        possession to the knowledge of the transferor or his
        successor in title or interest and that the latter had
        acquiesced to his illegal possession during the entire
        period of 12 years, i.e., up to completing the period his title
        by prescription nec vi, nec clam, nec precario."
2934.         In Karnataka Board of Wakf Vs. Government of
India & others (2004) 10 SCC 779, the Court held that
whenever the plea of adverse possession is projected, inherent
therein is that someone else is the owner of the property. In para
12 it said:
              "The pleas on title and adverse possession are
        mutually inconsistent and the latter does not begin to
        operate until the former is renounced."
2935.         The decision in Mohal Lal (supra) has also been
followed in Karnataka Board of Wakf (supra) and in para 13,
the Court said:
              "As we have already found, the respondent obtained
        title under the provisions of the Ancient Monuments Act.
        The element of the respondent's possession of the suit
        property to the exclusion of the appellant with the animus
        to possess it is not specifically pleaded and proved. So are
        the aspects of earlier title of the appellant or the point of
        time of disposition. Consequently, the alternative plea of
        adverse possession by the respondent is unsustainable."
2936.         The propositions laid down above, in our view,
admit no exceptions and we are in general respectful agreement.
2937.         Thus in the light of the above legal principles, we
                                                                2799

shall endeavour to find out whether Muslims are in possession
of the property in suit i.e. Suit-1 from 1528 AD continuously,
openly and to the knowledge of plaintiff and Hindus in general,
and, if so, its effect. Here we may remind that property in suit
with reference to Suit-1 means the inner courtyard and the
building.
2938.       First of all, the pleadings need be seen to find out
entry of Muslims for taking possession of the property in suit, as
claimed, from 1528 AD. Their case is that (a) the disputed
structure was raised by Emperor Babar after conquering India
and during the period when he stayed at Ayodhya through his
Governor/Commander/Counselor (Vazir) Mir Baqi in 1528 AD.
(b) After construction of the disputed structure he dedicated it as
Waqf in general for the benefit of entire Muslim and Muslims,
therefore, have a right of worship therein. (c) Emperor Babar
after the above construction of the disputed mosque (disputed
structure) made a grant of Rs. 60/- per annum from his royal
treasury towards Khitabat (recitation of Khutb), repair and
miscellaneous expenses of disputed mosque. (d) The above
grant continued during Mughal regime. During the period of
Nawabs of Awadh, the amount of grant was increased to Rs.
302 Anna 3 paissa 6 per annum. The above grant continued by
British Government also and at the time of first settlement.
2939.       It is in fact not disputed by learned counsels for the
parties that Babar-Nama, whether translated by A.S.Beveridge
or others i.e. John Layden, William Erskine, F.G.Talbot,
Elphinstone etc. none contain anything to show that Babar ever
entered Ayodhya city or crossed Saryu river or otherwise
reached thereto. The description available in Babar-Nama (the
description for the period 3rd April, 1528 to 17th September,
                                                                2800

1528 is not available), shows that Babar reached near Ayodhya
on 28.3.1528 AD and stayed about 2-3 kos away but with
respect to his visit or entry in Ayodhya, at least in Babar Nama,
there is nothing. Therefore, the question that he himself visited
Ayodhya and commanded for construction of a mosque thereat
does not arise. Similarly whether he issued such a command to
anyone is also not shown. Al least is is not proved at all. The
claim of the Muslim parties that as a result of dedication by
Babar, they came in possession, therefore, renders baseless and
falls on the ground.
2940.       It is also not in dispute that there is no evidence,
documentary or otherwise, which may show that Babar or any
of his agent made any waqf or dedicated any property for public
use or that the Muslims in general or in particular were placed in
possession of any part of the land comprising the disputed site
and no direct evidence is available.
2941.       We do find the situation improbable due to lapse of
long time but then in order to find out correctness of such a
positive averment, we have an option to look into other material
to search for other probabilities. Reason being that these are the
this is a facts pleaded by defendants 1 to 5 (Suit-1), as is evident
from para 9 and 16 of the plaint. This is a fact in issue,
therefore, evidence has to be adduced by the defendants 1 to 5
(Suit-1). The burden lie on them. Since all the four suits were
clubbed together and evidence has been recorded permitting to
be used interchangeably we make no distinction in evidence if
led on behalf of muslim parties. On this aspect, their stand is
substantially same.
2942.       The burden primarily lie on the party who desires
the Court to give judgment as to any legal right or liability
                                                                  2801

dependent on the existence of fact which he asserts. In other
words, a person who has invited a Court to give judgment on
any legal right or liability and in support thereof has pleaded
existence of certain facts to prove the existence of those facts,
the result of the person failing to do so, would go against him.
When the muslim parties plead that the Muslims have
possession over the wakf Maszid Babri since 1528, the burden
of proof lie upon the plaintiffs to prove existence of the said
facts. There cannot be any defence that the matter relates back
to an event which occurred 433 years back, and suit was filed
after more than 400 years, therefore, it is not possible to produce
any direct evidence. Since it is a fact not admitted by the other
side, i.e., the Hindu parties, burden of proof lie upon the muslim
parties to prove the aforesaid facts. In a issue relating to the title
no presumption can help. This would also not be a matter of
public history for which the Court may resort for its aid to
appropriate books and documents of reference under Section 57
of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (hereinafter referred to as
"Evidence Act"). In a title suit, the contents of Gazetteer etc.
also cannot be relied to prove title of the party concerned but
they have to prove the same by producing relevant evidence.
Though we have not excluded various historical documents and
books made available to us to find out the truth, primarily onus
lie upon the muslim parties to place relevant evidence so as to
claim successful execution of the plea of continuous possession.
2943.       Issue No. 7 (Suit-1) though not very specifically but
is based on the claim of Muslim parties that they have matured
their title due to adverse possession, this issue has been framed
and, therefore, requisite pleadings and proofs, i.e., onus would
lie upon the defendants no. 1 to 5 and 10. We have reproduced
                                                                 2802

the pleadings of the defendants 1 to 5 and 10 relevant for the
aforesaid Issue No. 7 (Suit-1) and it is evident therefrom that the
claim for title on account of adverse possession was pleaded
only in para 16 of the written statement of defendants no. 1 to 5
but no such pleading find mention in the written statement filed
on behalf of defendant no. 10. The defendants no. 1 to 5 have
died long back and there is no substitution in Suit-1 except of
defendant no. 2/1. Therefore, strictly speaking, except defendant
no. 2/1, the defendants no. 1 and 3 to 5 cease to be party in Suit-
1. However, no evidence led on behalf of these defendants.
2944.         The pleadings of defendant no. 10 are much short of
the requirement of such a case of possession. Despite our best
endeavour, we find no clear averments or something even
suggesting their claim with regard to title on the basis of adverse
possession. The principles laid down for defence based on
adverse possession necessitates party to plead who is the owner
of the property against whom he is possessing the land to his
knowledge, and is continuously, openly enjoying it peacefully
for the period of limitation prescribed under the statute and that
too exclusive and uninterrupted. We find no such pleading in the
written statement of defendant no. 10 (Suit-1). In fact, the
defendant no. 10 in para 19 of its written statement has pleaded
that the plaintiff has neither shown any personal claim or title
over the property in suit nor has been able to set up any right or
title over the said property on the basis of customary or
easementary right. Para 19 of the written statement of defendant
no. 10 in Suit-1 is reproduced as under:
        "That the plaintiff has neither shown any personal claim or
        title in the plaint over the property in suit nor he has been
        able to set up any right or title over the said property on
                                                               2803

        the basis of customary or easementary right,"
2945.        This shows that the defendant no. 10 was aware that
the suit has not been filed by the plaintiff claiming himself to be
the owner of the property in dispute or having a title over the
same in any other manner. Further, from a reading of para 10,
11 and 25 of the written statement of defendant no. 10 together,
it appears that the claim of defendant no. 10 throughout in Suit-
1 is that the ownership of the property in dispute vest in God
almighty after the creation of Wakf and construction of a
Mosque by Mir Baki during the regime of Emperor Babar and
since then, it continuously being used and possessed by
Muslims for worship and none else. In para 17 of the written
statement, defendant no. 10 has pleaded that the plaintiff has
never remained in possession or occupation of the building in
suit, he has no right, title or claim over the said property and as
such the suit is barred by the provisions of Section 41 of the
Specific Relief Act. In para 15, the case set up is that Muslims
had all along remained in possession of the said mosque right
from 1528 AD upto the date of attachment of the said mosque
under Section 145 Cr.P.C. We may add that the date of
attachment is 29th December, 1949. Therefore, in the entire
written statement of defendant no. 10, we fail to find any case of
adverse possession set up by defendant no. 10. So far as simple
possession since 1528 AD is concerned, even in that respect no
evidence has been placed.
2946.        It would be useful to refer certain observations of a
Single Judge of this Court in Abdul Halim Khan Vs. Raja
Saadat Ali Khan and others, AIR 1928 Oudh 155, which, in
our view, squarely applies to the facts and pleadings of this case
and we are in respectfully agreement therewith:
                                                                  2804

        "One of the general principles governing the law of
        limitation is that a person can only be considered to be
        barred, if he has a right to enter and does not exercise that
        right within the period fixed by the Limitation Act. The
        maxim of law is contra non valentem agree nulla currit
        praescriptio (prescription does not run against a party who
        is unable to act); vide Broom's Legal Maxims, 9th edn., p.
        576. Accordingly possession cannot become adverse
        against a person as long as he is not entitled to claim
        immediate possession. Ex facie it must follow that a person
        who is not in existence cannot be considered to be in a
        position to claim whether immediate or otherwise. It is
        evident that in the eyes of the law the plaintiff did not come
        into existence as long as he was not adopted. His adoption
        took place on 27th July 1914. He must be deemed to have
        come into existence only then. It was, therefore, obviously
        not possible for him to claim possession of the property
        before that date, and if he was not in a position to claim it
        at all, having not been then in existence, it would be absurd
        to say that another person was in possession adversely to
        him. One might fairly ask: "Adverse against whom?" It
        certainly cannot be adverse against the plaintiff, who
        was not then in existence. It may have been adverse
        against any other person, but we are not concerned with
        such person unless the plaintiff can be shown to have
        derived his title from such person." (page189-190)
2947.         Recently, in Vishwanath Bapurao Sabale (supra),
the Apex Court in respect to a claim of title based on the
pleading of adverse possession said as under:
        "for claiming title by adverse possession, it was necessary
                                                                    2805

        for the plaintiff to plead and prove animus possidendi.
        A peaceful, open and continuous possession being the
        ingredients of the principle of adverse possession as
        contained in the maxim nec vi, nec clam, nec precario, long
        possession by itself would not be sufficient to prove adverse
        possession."
2948.         What should have been pleaded and what a person
claiming adverse possession has to show has been laid down by
the Apex Court categorically in Karnataka Board of Wakf
(supra) :
              "11. In the eye of the law, an owner would be
        deemed to be in possession of a property so long as there is
        no intrusion. Non-use of the property by the owner even for
        a long time won't affect his title. But the position will be
        altered when another person takes possession of the
        property and asserts a right over it. Adverse possession is a
        hostile possession by clearly asserting hostile title in denial
        of the title of true owner. It is a well- settled principle that
        a party claiming adverse possession must prove that his
        possession is "nec vi, nec clam, nec precario", that is,
        peaceful, open and continuous. The possession must be
        adequate in continuity, in publicity and in extent to show
        that their possession is adverse to the true owner. It must
        start with a wrongful disposition of the rightful owner and
        be actual, visible, exclusive, hostile and continued over the
        statutory period. ..... Physical fact of exclusive possession
        and the animus posdendi to hold as owner in exclusion to
        the actual owner are the most important factors that are to
        be accounted in cases of this nature. Plea of adverse
        possession is not a pure question of law but a blended one
                                                                    2806

        of fact and law. Therefore, a person who claims adverse
        possession should show: (a) on what date he came into
        possession, (b) what was the nature of his possession, (c)
        whether the factum of possession was known to the other
        party, (d) how long his possession has continued, and (e)
        his possession was open and undisturbed. A person
        pleading adverse possession has no equities in his favour.
        Since he is trying to defeat the rights of true owner, it is for
        him to clearly plead and establish all facts necessary to
        establish his adverse possession."
2949.         Earlier also, a three-Judges Bench of Apex Court in
Parsinni & another Vs. Sukhi (supra) laid down the following
three requisites for satisfying the claim based on adverse
possession:
              "5. The appellants claimed adverse possession.
        The burden undoubtedly lies on them to plead and prove
        that they remained in possession in their own right adverse
        to the respondents. .... Possession is prima facie evidence
        of title. Party claiming adverse possession must prove that
        his possession mast be "nee vi nee clam nee precario" i.e.
        peaceful, open and continuous. The possession must be
        adequate, in continuity, in publicity and in extent to
        show that their possession is adverse to the true owner."
2950.         In Maharaja Sir Kesho Prasad Singh Bahadur
(supra), it was held that in order to obtain a favourable finding
of adverse possession, one must have to satisfy all the qualities
of adequacy, continuity and exclusiveness. Reliance was placed
on Kuthali Moothavur Vs. P. Kunharankutty AIR 1922 PC
181.
2951.         We can look into this issue from another angle. A
                                                                 2807

perusal of the entire plaint (suit-1) would show that the
plaintiff's case is not that of title or ownership of the property in
dispute. What he actually claim is that he believes and treat the
site in dispute being the birth place of Lord Rama having certain
religious symbols like, idol of Lord Rama, Charan Paduka etc.
which is worshipped by Pooja and Darshan since long past
without any obstruction and is entitled to exercise his aforesaid
right of worship without any interference. He expressed an
apprehension of removal of existing idols of Lord Rama kept at
the place in dispute, the boundary whereof is mentioned at the
bottom of the plaint (suit-1), hence, he has sought a declaration
that he is entitled to visit and worship the place in dispute
without any obstruction according to religious scriptures of
Hindus and the defendants have no right to interfere in the
aforesaid right of the plaintiff. He further has sought a
permanent mandatory injunction restraining the defendants from
removing idols of Lord Rama from the place they are, not to put
lock on the entry door and not to create any obstruction in Pooja
and Darshan in any manner. The boundary given at the bottom
of the plaint shows that the premises in dispute in Suit-1
constitute only the "inner courtyard" and "building" existed
thereat. In fact, the plaintiff has not even mentioned the
existence of any building but he has simply said that at the place
at which the idols of Lord Rama were existing on the date of
filing of the suit be not removed. The plaint is verified and
signed on 13th January 1950 and filed in the Court on 16.1.1950.
Therefore, averments in various paragraphs of the plaint
obviously relate at least to that date.
2952.       There is no claim of ownership or title by the
plaintiff. It is a simple suit seeking continuous enforcement of
                                                               2808

right of worship and a restraint order against the defendants
from creating any obstruction in exercise of the said right. In the
absence of any claim set up by the plaintiff about his title etc.,
we find no occasion on the part of the defendants to claim that
they are possessing property in dispute continuously, openly and
to the knowledge of the plaintiff, and Hindus in general, when
all this has nothing to do with the plaintiff's right of worship
which he claims to have been exercising much before the date of
filing of the suit and want continuance of that right without any
interference. So far as the plea of holding possession of the
property in dispute against the Hindus in general, we find that a
statement under Order X Rule 2 C.P.C. was made on behalf of
the plaintiff on 15.09.1951 wherein it has clearly been stated
that Suit-1 is not a representative suit but has been filed for
enforcing personal right of worship of the plaintiff, as is evident
from following:
        "Q. In what capacity does the plaintiff seek to exercise
        the relief which he seeks in the plaint.
        Ans. In my individual capacity.

        Q.    What is your individual capacity.
        Ans. My individual capacity is distinct from public
        capacity and in this matter an idol worshipper."
2953.         The case set up by the defendant-muslim parties
against the plaintiffs in this case is a bit in deviation to what
actually the dispute is. The plaintiffs neither asserted his
possession over the property in dispute nor disputed anybody's
possession. 'Possession' means what we understand even if it has
to be seen in the context every time as defined and discussed in
detail above. The consensus of the meaning of the word
possession or what the term "possession" connotes is something
                                                                2809

showing actual power over the object concern, amount of will
one can exercise, and intention to possess something. Not the
least, the power of authority to exclude others is also an integral
part thereof. Possession is nine parts of the law means the
person in possession can only be ousted by one whose title is
better than his. All these factors, in our view, are absent when a
person claims exercise of a right other than based on possession.
The plaintiff has sought to assert right of worship at the place in
dispute, alleging some kind of interference at the end of
defendants. He has sought a declaration about his right of
worship, and, its enforcement without any restriction and further
that the place in dispute as it stood on the date he filed the suit
should remain undisturbed since he had been exercising his right
of worship with the same status in the past also. The later
question necessarily give birth to another question as to whether
the status of the place in dispute, as stated on the date of filing
of the suit, was actually the same for sufficiently past time as
claimed by the plaintiff. That may be one which need to be
decided on the basis of evidence, but so far as principal question
is concerned it remains the same, i.e., enforcement of right of
worship only, without claiming title, ownership or possession of
the property. A worshipper when go to a religious place does
not come into possession of the place of worship since it is a
kind of incorporeal right not connected directly with the
possession of the property in the sense, the term "possession in
law" usually is known but it is a kind of enjoyment of a property
and that too temporarily, for a small time, though frequently. As
stated by the Privy Council in Mosque known as Masjid
Shahid Ganj (supra) the right of worshipper may be regarded
as an individual right. It is not a sort of easement in gross but an
                                                                2810

ultimate in general right of a beneficiary. This individual
character of the right to go to a mosque or temple for worship
matters nothing when the land is no longer a waqf or a temple.
If for one or the other reasons the subject itself goes or
disappear the right of all beneficiaries would also go and then
the worshipper cannot ask for recovery or reconstruction of the
endowment on the ground that since he had a beneficiary right
of worship, for his right cannot extend beyond subject matter. In
this case, the defendant, probably to defeat this assertion of the
plaintiff that the property in dispute is a temple open for worship
by a Hindu, pleaded the construction of mosque in 1528 AD and
continuous possession and worship by muslims since then. The
initial onus lie upon the plaintiff, but having discharged the
same, it shifts to the muslim side. The onus is different than
burden. Onus may continue to shift. That being so, obviously
the onus lie upon the muslim parties to prove it. To start, they
proceeded with two inscriptions claimed to be fixed on the
property in dispute since the time it was constructed. Those
inscriptions, we have already discussed in detail while
discussing issues relating to period of construction, and have
held that it is not proved that those inscriptions were installed in
1528 AD or that the building in dispute itself was constructed in
1528 AD and the muslim parties pleading this fact have not
been able to prove it. The two inscriptions have been held
unworthy of any reliance.
2954.       Next comes a complaint dated 28.11.1858 submitted
by Thanedar Sheetal Dube and some other documents which we
shall discuss a bit later. But at this stage we may point out that
the claim of adverse possession in the light of Article 144 or
extinction of title vide Section 27 of the Limitation Act, in a
                                                              2811

case where enforcement of a right of worship is involved, may
not be attracted.
2955.       When a right of worship is claimed and it is said that
no obstruction should be created therein, it is a de die indium
right and interference, if any, as and when made also would
confer a fresh cause of action. The Privy Council in Hukum
Chand Vs. Maharaj Bahadur Singh (supra) has said that the
section of the Swetambari in placing charans with the nails in
three of the shrines is a wrong of which the Digambaris are
entitled to complaint and is a continuing wrong, as to which
under Section 23 a fresh period begins to run at every moment
of the day on which the wrong continues.
2956.       That being so, since the cause of action is a
continuing one, the question of any benefit under Article 144 of
LA 1908 even otherwise would not arise.
2957.       If we take the Issue 7 (Suit-1) as if it only talks of
possession of the property in suit continuously, openly from
1528 to the knowledge of plaintiff, and Hindus in general, and
having no concern with the building, the nature of possession,
whether adverse or otherwise, even then we find that Muslims
have completely failed to prove the same. Except of bare
pleadings, nothing has been brought on record to prove that the
Muslims kept possession of the property in Suit from 1528 and
onwards. The issues pertaining to date of construction have
already been decided by us and we have recorded a finding that
the Muslim parties have failed to prove that the disputed
structure was constructed in 1528. In view of the aforesaid
finding, the question of possession of property in dispute by
Muslims in 1528 even otherwise would not arise. There are a
few published documents, i.e., books which throw some light
                                                               2812

about the persons visiting the disputed site between 1528 to
1858. The first one is a Travellers' Account of William Finch
who visited India between 1607 to 1611. Therein neither he
found any such Mosque in the area called fort of Ram Chandra
nor he found any Muslim person visiting that area. Instead he
has mentioned that Hindus visit the place in the belief that it is
the place belong to Lord Rama. This Traveller's Account has
been published by William Foster in his book "Early Travels in
India" (supra) (Book No. 60). At page 176 thereof (Exhibit 19
Suit 5, Register 21 Page 271), William Finch has said:
        "the castle built foure hundred yeeres agoe. Heere are also
        the ruines of Ranichand(s) castle and houses, which the
        Indians acknowled(g)e for the great God, saying that he
        tooke flesh upon him to see the tamasha of the world. In
        these ruines remayne certaine Bramenes, who record the
        names of all such Indians as wash themselves in the river
        running thereby; which custome, they say, hath continued
        foure Iackes of yeeres ..."
2958.         Then comes the Traveller's Account of Father
Joseph Tieffenthaler, who visited Oudh area sometimes between
1766 to 1771. He mentions, Emperor Aurengzebe got the
fortress called Ramcot demolished and got a Muslim temple,
with triple domes, constructed at the same place. Others say that
is was constructed by 'Babor'. Fourteen black stone pillars of 5
span high, which had existed at the site of the fortress, are seen
there. Tieffenthaler did not find any Muslim visiting the said
place which is clearly the place in dispute. Tieffenthelar,
however, has referred to the visit of Hindus and their worship in
the disputed site by going for parikrama thrice and prostrating
on the ground.
                                                                2813

2959.         Then       comes   Walter   Hamilton's   "East India
Gazetteer" (supra) (first published in 1828). On page 353
under heading 'Oude', he says:
              "This town is esteemed one of the most sacred places
        of antiquity."
              Pilgrims resort to this vicinity, where the remains of
        the ancient city of Oude, and capital of the great Rama, are
        still to be seen; but whatever may have been its former
        magnificence it now exhibits nothing but a shapeless mass
        of ruins. .... among which are the reputed site of temples
        dedicated to Rama, Seeta, his wife, Lakshman, his general,
        and Hanimaun (a large monkey), his prime minister. The
        religious mendicants who perform the pilgrimage to Oude
        are chiefly of the Ramata sect, who walk round the
        temples and idols, bathe in the holy pools, and perform the
        customary ceremonies."
2960.         In 1858 came another "Gazetter" of Edward
Thornton (supra) (Book No. 10) (Exhibit 5, Suit-5). There also
is a mention of building of a Mosque after demolition of a
temple. It also says that the Mosque is embellished with
fourteen columns of only five or six feet in height, but of very
elaborate and tasteful workmanship. It also talks of a
quadrangular coffer of stone, whitewashed, five ells long, four
broad, and protruding five or six inches above ground as the
cradle in which Rama was born as the seventh avatar of Vishnu;
and is accordingly abundantly honoured by the pilgrimages and
devotions of the Hindus. This clearly show the existence of the
Bedi found by Tieffenthaler at the disputed site, reiterated by
Edward Thornton in his Gazetteer published in 1858, and that
the Hindus used to visit the property in suit but there is nothing
                                                                               2814

to show that at any point of time Namaz was offered by
Muslims and they used to visit it.
2961.          There are some documents also and their effect may
be perused hereat. The first document is a letter/application
dated 28th November, 1858 of Sheetal Dubey, Thanedar
(Exhibit-19, Suit-1) (Register -5, page 61) which says as under:
                                                               ‫غریب پرور سلمت‬
        ‫خداوندآج کے روز مسمی نہگ سنگھ فقیر خالصہ سییاکن ملییک پنجییاب بیییچ‬
        ‫مسجد جنم استھان کہ ہون اور پوجا گورگوینیید سیینگھ مقییرر کیییا اور نشییان‬
        ‫شری بھگوان کہ کھڑا کیا اور پچیس نفرسیکھ بہی واسییطے حفییاظت وقییت‬
        ‫کہڑا کرنے نشان کہ وہاں پر۔ واجب ت ھا عییرض کیییا ٓافتییاب دولییت اقبییال کییا‬
        ‫روشن ہو فقط‬
        ‫عرضی‬
        ‫ء‬۱۸۵۸ ‫ نومبر‬۲۸ ‫فدوی سیتل دوبے تھانے دار اودہ مورخہ‬
        ^^xjhc ijoj lyker]
               [kqnkoUn vkt ds jkst+ eqlEeh fugax flag Q+d+hj [kkylk lkfdu
        eqYd iatkc chp elftn tUe vLFkku ds gou vkSj iwtk xq: xkskfcUn
        flag eqdjZj fd;k vkSj fu'kku Jh Hkxoku ds [kM+k fd;k vkSj iPPkhl
        uQ+j fl[k Hkh okLrs fgQ+kt+r oD+r [kM+k djus fu'kku ds ogka ij gSaA
        okftc Fkk vt+Z fd;kA vkQ+rkc nkSyr bd+cky dk jkS'ku gks [kq'kA
               Q+d+r
                                                            vthZ
        fQ+noh 'khry nqcs Fkkusnkj vo/k eksj[kk 28 uoEcj lu~ 1858 bZ ۰
                                                  (Hindi Transliteration)
        Gareeb Parwar salamat Khuda wand,
               Today Mr. Nihang Singh Faqir Khalsa resident of
        Punjab, organised Hawan and Puja of Guru Govind
        Singh and erected a symbol of Sri Bhagwan, within the
        premises of the Masjid. At the time of pitching the symbol,
        25 sikhs were posted there for security. Deemed necessary
        so requested. May your regime progress. Pleasure.
                                                                       2815

                                                            Applicant.
                                                 Your obedient servant
                                        Sheetal Dubey, Thanedar Oudh
                                           Dated November 28, 1858."

2962.         A perusal of the said letter/application shows that it
was a kind of information conveyed by the above police official
seeking instructions for further action but do not show either
that the Muslims were in possession of the property or the
building in dispute or the disputed site or that there used to be
any Namaz therein. But this, however, shows that on the site in
dispute, existence of Mosque is recognised.
2963.         The letter dated 30th November, 1858 (Exhibit 20,
Suit-1) (Register 5, page 65) is a complaint made by Syed
Mohd. claiming himself to be a Khateeb (Moazzim Maszid
Babri) at Oudh. The contents of this document have also been
published in a Book which has been placed before us. Exhibit
17 (Suit-5) (Register 20, pages 187-197) contains photocopy of
frontispiece and Annexure-4 from the book "Babri Masjid" by
Syed Shahabuddin Abdurrhman, 3rd Edn. 1987 published at
Azamgarh. It contains contents of a petition of Mohammad
Asgar on 30.11.1858. The typed Hindi transliteration supplied
by the plaintiffs (Suit-5) at page 197 Register 20 (paper no.
107C1/81) reads as under:
        ^^¼ckcjh efLtn½
              tukc vkyh eqd+ke x+kSj dk gS efLtn eqd+ke bcknr eqlyekuku
        gS u fd c[ks+ykQ+ ml ds cotsg gquwn dh o lkfcd+ esa d+Cy esa
        veynkjh ljdkj eq d +k e tue LFkku dk lngk cjl ds fu'kku
        iM+k jgrk Fkk o vgy s gq u wn iwt k djrs Fk sA       pcwrjk clkft'k
        f'ko xqyke Fkkusnkj vo/k ds cSjkfx;ksa us 'kck'kc esa rk lqnwjs gqDe
        ljdkj ds okLrs eqekfu;r ds ukfQt+ gqvk Fkk ccqyUnh ,d okfy'r
        rS;kj djk fy;kA ml oD+r lkgsc fMIVh dfe'uj cgknqj us ceksftc
        gqDe tukc lkgc dfe'kuj cgknqj ds Fkkusnkj dks ekSdwQ+ fd;k o cSjkxh
                                                                      2816

        ij tqekZuk eqrv;~;u gqvk vc fQ+ygky bl pcwrjs dh Hkh rjoehuu
        lok xt+ rS;kj djk fy;k gS bl lwjr ljhg ft;knrh lkfcr gS ysgkt+k
        mEehnokj gWwa fd cuke eqjrtk [kka dksroky 'kgj lqnwj gqDe gksos fd
        dksroky cp'e [kqn eksvkbZuk djds meqjkr tnhn [kqnok Mkysa o
        ejnqeku gquwn dks ckgj efLtn djsa A
                                                   lS;~;n eksgEen [k+rhc
                                         eksvfTt+u efLtn ckcjh okd+S vo/k
                                              30 uoEcj 1858 bZ^^
        Respected Sir, It is matter of your honour's attention.
        Kindly consider the fact that Masjid is a place of worship
        of the Muslims and not that of Hindus. Previously the
        symbol of Janamasthan had been there for hundreds of
        years and Hindus did Puja. Because of conspiracy of Shiv
        Ghulam Thandedar Oudh Government, the Bairagis
        constructed overnight a Chabutra up to height of one
        'Balisht' until the orders of injunction were issued. At that
        time the Deputy Commissioner suspended the Thanedar
        and fine was imposed on Bairagis. Now the Chabootra has
        been raised to about 1¼ yards. Thus sheer high-
        handedness has been proved. Therefore it is requested that
        Murtaza Khan Kotwal City may be ordered that he himself
        visit the spot and inspect the new constructions and get
        them demolished (sic) and oust the Hindus from there; the
        symbol and the idol may be removed from there and
        writing on the walls be washed.".
                                        Sd/- Syed Mohammad Khatib,
                                 Moazzim Masjid Babri sites in Oudh
                                    Dated November 30, 1858." (ETC)
        Copy of letter dated 30.11.1858 is Exhibit 20 (Suit-1)
(Register-5 page 65).
2964.         This complaint is also in the same line as that of the
                                                               2817

letter dated 28th November, 1858 (Ex.-19, Suit 1). It also does
not show that regular Namaz was offered in the disputed
building or disputed site or that the Muslims used to visit
regularly or occasionally treating it a place of worship. On the
contrary, complaint says that the Hindu religious symbols have
been placed inside and for hundreds of years Hindus are
worshipping thereat. This goes against the claim that Namaz
was going on. It proves that no namaz inside at least till 30 th
November, 1858 when the above complaint made or was
offered. Further, at the disputed site, worship by Hindus was
continuing and that too for the last hundreds of years.
2965.       Exhibit 21 (Suit-1) (Register 5 page 69-72A) is a
report dated 01.12.1858 submitted by Sheetal Dubey Thanedar
Oudh communicating the order of higher authority to Sant
Nihang Singh, Faqir for leaving the place but receive no reply.
Sheetal Dubey reported what actually transpired. There is
nothing to show that actually the aforesaid/Nihang was evicted
from the disputed site or that symbol of worship etc., he had
created, was removed. It also appear that Sheetal Dubey sought
further instructions from higher authority. To us, this document
also does not help the Muslims to prove their possession at the
disputed site and the building.
2966.       Exhibit 22 (Suit-1) (Register 5, page 73) is again a
report dated 6th December, 1858 of Sheetal Dubey informing
that the notice of eviction was served upon Nihang Singh Fakir.
This also does not inform the consequences of such service.
2967.       It appears that an order was passed to oust the Fakir
and remove symbol and to arrest him and send to the Court.
Exhibit A-70 (Suit-1) (Register 8, Page 573) is a copy of the
said order dated 15th December, 1858.
                                                                                  2818

        ‫ عرضییی تھانیییداراودہ دوبییارہ ک ھڑا کرنیے‬۸۸۴ ‫ءمقدمہ‬۵۸ ‫نقل حکم مقدمہ‬
        ۶ ‫نشییان در مسییجد جنییم اسییتھان ٹیییک سیینگھ فقیییر خالسییہ کییے منفصییلے‬
        ‫ء‬۱۸۵۸ ‫دسمبرسن‬
        ‫ نومییبر سیین نییک‬۳۰ ‫آج یک مقدمہ روبکار ہوکہ دریافت ہوا کیہ حسییب حکییم‬
        ‫فقیرکو جو مسجد بابری میں بیٹھا ہے روانہ کیا۔‬
        ‫حکم ہواکہ‬
        ‫پروانہ بنام تھانیدار آودہ کیا جاوے کہ اگر فقیر نہیں آتییاہے تییو اسییکو گرفتییار‬
        ‫ء‬۵۸ ‫ دسمبر سن‬۵ ‫کرکے روانہ حضور کریں۔‬
        ‫دستخط حاکم‬
               "Copy of the order dated 05.12.58, Suit No.884.
        Application Thanedar Oudh for re-erecting the symbol in
        the Majid Janam Asthan, Tek Singh Faqir Khalsa.....
        (Sic)...decided on December 6, 1858.
               In the case was Robekar issued today. It was known
        that as per order dated November 30, 1858, the Faqir
        sitting in the Masjid Babri be ousted. Parwana to the
        Thanedar Oudh with the order ..... (Sic)... that if the
        Faqir does not move from there, he should be arrested
        and sent to the Court. December 5, 58.
                                         Signature of the officer in English.
                                                   Note ............is not legible."
2968.          Pursuant thereto Thanedar P.S. Oudh submitted
report i.e. Ex. A-69 (Suit 1) (Register 8 Page 569) on the same
date of its compliance i.e. removal of religious symbol and
ouster of Faqir from the mosque. It says:
        ‫ عرضیییی‬۸۸۴ ‫ء مقیییدمہ نومیییبر‬۱۸۵۸ ‫ دسیییمبر‬۱۰ ‫نقیییل حکیییم میییورخہ‬
        ‫تھانیداراودہ دربارہ کھڑا کرنے نشان درمسجد جنییم اسییتھان سیینت ٹیییک‬
                 ِ ‫سنگھ فقیر خالصہ کے محلہ رام کوٹ )کوٹ رام چندر( منفص‬
        ‫ دسمبر‬۱۵ ‫ل‬
        ‫ء‬۱۸۵۸ ‫سن‬
        ‫آج روبکار ہوا جسمیں جھنڈا مسجد جنم استھان سے اکھاڑا گیا جو فقیییرآ‬
                                                                         2819

        ‫کےرہا تھا نکال گیا۔‬
                                     ‫حکم ہواکہ‬
        ‫ء‬۱۸۵۸ ‫ د سمبر‬۱۰ ‫مقدمہ خارج ہوکے داخل دفتر ہو‬
               ^^udy gqdqe eksj[kk 10 fnlEcj 1858 bZ0 eqdnek ua0 884 vthZ
        Fkkuknkj vo/k [kM+k djus fu'kku nj efLtn tUeLFkku lUr Vsd flag
        Qdhj [kkylk ds eksgYyk jkedksV dksV jkepUnj equQlyk 15 fnlEcj
        1758 vkt jkscdkj gqvk ftlesa >aMk efLtn tUeLFkku ls m[kkM+k x;k
        tks Qdhj vkds jgrk Fkk fudkyk x;kA
               gqdqe gqvk fd eqdnek [kkfjt gksds nkf[kys nQ~rj gksA**
               "Copy of the order dated December 10, 1858 Suit
        No.884 on the application of Thanedar Oudh for re-
        erecting the symbol within Masjid Janam Sthan. Saint Tek
        Singh Faqir, Khalsa, resident of Mohalla Ram Kot, (Kot
        Ram Chandra), decided on December 15, 1858. Robekar
        issued today in which Jhanda (flag) was uprooted from the
        Masjid Janam Asthan and the Faqir residing therein was
        ousted. Ordered that the case be consigned to the office.
        Dec. 10, 1858."
2969.          Exhibit 31 (Suit 1) (Register 5, Page 117-121) is
another application dated 05.11.1860 by Mir Rajab Ali
complaining that a Chabootara and a pillar made within Babari
Masjid Oudh may be removed after due enquiry as it is in
violation of law. However, there is a mention that whenever the
Moazzim calls for Azan, Bairagis create nuisance by blowing
Conch shell. Nothing more is said therein.
2970.          Exhibit 54 (Suit-4) (Register 12 page 359) is an
application dated 12th March, 1861 by Mohd. Asghar, Mir
Razab Ali and Mohd. Afzal as Khateeb/Moazzin, Masjid Babri
situated Janam Asthan Oudh stating that some Imkani Singh has
made a Chabutara near Masjid Babri at Janam Asthan Oudh and
despite of order to remove, has not complied the same. There is
                                                             2820

nothing to show that there was any compliance even thereafter
and at any point of time later.
2971.       It appears that Deputy Commissioner Fyzabad on
18th March 1862 directed to consign the record to office.
2972.       There are some further documents i.e. Ex. A-16
(Suit 1) (Register 7, page 185-191); Ex. A-14 (Suit 1) (Register
7 Page 181); Ex. A-17 (Suit 1) (Register 7 page 193-197)
regarding the grant of village Bahooranpur and Sholapuri in lieu
of the cash grant of Rs.302 and 3 and a half anna for
maintaining the mosque subject to showing a conduct of peace
and to perform all duties of landholders in matter of police and
political service as required by them by the authorities and not
to favour in any way the enemies of British Government. It
appears that the three persons were more interested in obtaining
the land grant and the building in dispute was used by them as
object for such gain cover but no document shows that at any
point of time either the Muslims attended the mosque to offer
Namaz therein till then or that even those persons who were
alleging or representing themselves as Khatib or Mutwalli of the
mosque ever made any arrangement for ensuring offering of
Namaz by Muslims therein.
2973.       Exhibit A-13 (Suit-1) (Register 6 page 173) is an
application dated 25.09.1866 by Mohd. Afzal Mutwalli Masjid
Babri situated at Oudh complaining about a Kothari constructed
by some Bairagis and that they are also trying to built a temple
near mosque. The request was made to stop them and remove
construction already made.
2974.       The above complaint was made by Mohd. Afzal
though earlier only Mohd. Asgar and Mir Rajab Ali has claimed
themselves to be Mutwalli of the said mosque and obtained
                                                              2821

grant in their name. How and in what manner Mohd. Afjal
became Mutwalli is not known.
2975.       Exhibit 29 (Suit-1) (Register 5, page 105) dated 12th
October, 1866 is an order of Deputy Commissioner, Faizabad on
the complaint of Mohd. Afzal against Tulsidas and others
directing consignment of record to office.
2976.       It appears that Mohd. Asgar as Khatib and Mohd.
Afjal as Muazzim Masjid Babari moved an application dated
22nd February, 1870 stating their claim on 21 trees of Imli on the
ground that Masjid Babari situtated at Janam Asthan is ancestral
and under the possession of them since ancient times hence a
decree be issued in respect to graveyard and Imli trees in their
favour.
2977.       By order dated 22nd August, 1871 Exhibit 25 (Suit
1) (Register 5 page 87) the claim of Mohd. Asgar about
ownership of graveyard was rejected but regarding the tamarind
trees, his claim was allowed.
2978.       Exhibit 30 (Suit 1) (Register 5 page 107) is a memo
of appeal no. 56 filed against the order dated 3rd April 1877 of
Deputy Commissioner Faizabad whereby he had granted
permission to Hindus to open a new door in the northern outer
wall of the disputed building. It was complained that the wall
being that of the mosque, this alternation could not have been
allowed to Hindus. It also complained that on 7th November,
1873 Mahant Baldev Das was ordered to remove idol i.e.
Charan Paduka but has failed to comply. Hence permission to
open a door in the wall of Masjid Babari could not have been
given to him. He also complained of making of a "Chulha" in
the compound for Puja by Baldeo Dass Bairagi and request was
made for removal of this new construction.
                                                                2822

2979.      Exhibit 15 (Suit 1) (Register 5 page 41-43) is a
report submitted by the Deputy Commissioner on the appeal of
Mohd. Asgar permitting opening of a door on the northern outer
wall of the disputed building. He treated outer compound i.e. the
outer courtyard as Janam Asthan and the disputed building
inside the grilled partition wall as mosque and said that for the
convenience of visitors to Janam Asthan and rush on fair days,
the said opening was allowed in public interest. He also declared
attempt of Mohd. Asgar lacking bona fide.
2980.      Mohd. Asgar filed suit no.374/943 Exhibit 24 (Suit
1) (Register 5 page 83-85) claiming rent against user of
Chabutara and Takhat near the door of Babari Masjid for
organizing Kartik Mela at the occasion of Ram Navmi regarding
1288-1289 Fasli. It shows that in the courtyard and Chabutara,
since ancient times, Mela Kartiki and Ram Navmi was being
organized. This suit was dismissed on 18th June, 1883.
2981.      An application dated 2nd November, 1883, Exhibit
18 (Suit 1) (Register 5 Page 55) was submitted by Mohd. Asgar
as Mutwalli Masjid Babari claiming that he is entitled to get the
wall of mosque whitewashed but is being obstructed by
Raghubar Das though he has right only to the extent of
Chabutara and Rasoi.
2982.      The Assistant Commissioner thereafter passed the
following order on 22nd January, 1884 Exhibit 27 (Suit 1)
(Register 5 Page 95):
         ۱۹۴۳۵ ‫ء مقدمہ نمبر‬۱۸۸۴ ‫ جنوری‬۲۲ ‫نقل فرد منفصیلہ احکام مورخہ‬
           ‫ء اجلسی جناب اسیسٹینٹ‬۱۸۸۴ ‫ جنوری‬۲۲ ‫واقع جنم استھان اودہ‬
                                         ‫کمیشنر صاحب ہبادر فیض آباد‬
                                                      ‫سید محمد اصغر‬
                                                                ‫بنام‬
                                                                 2823

                                                         ‫رگہوبر داس‬
         ‫آج مقدمہ بحاضری فریقین پیش ہوا فریقین کو حکم صاحب ڈپٹی‬
    ‫کمیشنربہادر سے اطلع دی گی اور رگہوبر داس کو فہماش کی گی کہ‬
  ‫اندرونی و بیرونی احاطہ و دروازہ مسجد کی مرمت وغیرہ نہ کریں اور‬
     ‫محمد اصغر کو سمجھا دیا گیا کہ بیرونی دروازہ قفل نہ لگایا جاوے یہ‬
   ‫مناسب ضروری ہے کہ عمل درامد قدیم بحال رکھا جاے اور کوءی دستہ‬
                                           ‫اندازی و مداخلت نہ کہ جاو۔‬
                                                           ‫حکم ہوا کہ‬
                     ‫ء‬۸۴ ‫ جنوری‬۲۲ ‫کاغذات ہذا داخل دفتر ہو المرقوم‬
^^udy QnZ vgdke eksj[kk 22 tuojh 1884 bZ0 eqdnek ua0 19435
okds tUe LFkku vo/k equQlyk 22 tuojh 1884 bZ0 btyklh tukc
vflLVsUV dfe'uj lkgc cgknqj QStkckn
lS;~;n eqgEen vlxj cuke j?kqcj nkl
vkt eqdnek cgkftjh QjhdSu is'k gqvk QjhdSu dks gqDe lkgc fMIVh
dfe'uj ls bfRryk nh xbZ vkSj j?kqcj nkl ds Qgekb'k dh xbZ fd
vUn:uh o cs:uh vgkrk o njoktk elftn dh ejEer oxSjg u djs
vkSj eqgEen vlxj dks le>k fn;k x;k fd ckgjh njoktk dqQ~y u
yxk;k tkosa ;g fugk;r t:jh gS fd vey njken dnhe cgky j[kk
tkos vkSj dksbZ nLr vUnkth u enk[kyr u dh tkosA
                           gqDe gqvk fd
dkxtkr gktk nkf[ky nQ~ r j gk s vRejdwe
                          22 tuojh 84 bZ0^^
"Copy of the order sheet dated January 22, 1884 in case
no. 19435-Janamsthan, Judgement dated January 22,
1884, Ijlasi Janab Assistant Commissioner Sahab Bahadur
Faizabad.
      Syed Mohd. Asghar vs. Raghubar Das.
      Today the case was called out in presence of the
parties. As per orders of the Deputy Commissioner, parties
were informed accordingly. Raghubar Das was restrained
from carrying out repairs etc in the internal and outer part
                                                                   2824

        of the compound and Mohd. Asghar was advised not to
        lock the outer door of the mosque. It is necessary that the
        old existing orders be observed and complied with and
        there should be no interference in it.
                         Order.
                   All the papers be consigned.
                                            Dated January 22, 84.
                                                   Sd/- English."
2983.         Raghubar Das made a complaint dated 27.06.1884
Exhibit 28 (Suit 1) (Register 5 Page 99-101) to the Assistant
Commissioner requesting him to make spot inspection since the
Muslims      were    violating   the   order     of   desisting   from
whitewashing the wall.
2984.         Then comes the admitted litigation (mentioned in
written statement) relied by the defendant Muslim parties
heavily, i.e., 1885 Suit which also says that in the outer
courtyard there existed Ram Chabutara, Sita Rasoi             and the
same visited by Hindus but there is not even a whisper that the
Muslims at any point of time visited the disputed site and
offered Namaz.
2985.         In order to find out whether the words or phrases
used by the parties in the plaint amounts to admission or not one
has to find out whether the assertion is clear and unambiguous
or it is sometimes a loose expression due to the reason of
draftman casualness or otherwise. In Mohd. Shah Vs.
Fasihuddin Ansari (supra) while observing that the assertions
of one Gulab were nothing but loose expression, the Court
observed:
              "Inadvertent expressions of dubious and ambiguous
        meaning cannot be twisted into admissions against the
        maker's interest when the surrounding circumstances
        indicate that he had been consistently asserting the
                                                               2825

        contrary over a series of years. Something stronger than
        that would be required. Had the assertions been clear and
        unambiguous the matter would have been different but
        "Imambara     mosque    compound"     is   anything    but
        clear."(Para 33)
2986.        It is true that P. Carnegy in his book "Historical
Sketch" (supra) has mentioned in detail about Ramkot and
thereafter he has dealt with the disputed place on pages 20 and
21. Under the heading "Hindu Muslim Differences", he has said:
        "The Janmasthan is within a few hundred paces of the
        Hanuman Garhi. In 1855, when a great rupture took place
        between the Hindus and Muhammadans, the former
        occupied the Hanuman Garhi in force, while the
        Musalmans took possession of the Janmasthan......The
        Hindus then followed up this success, and at the third
        attempt took the Janmasthan, at the gate of which 75
        Mahomedans are buried in the "Martyrs' grave" (Ganj-
        Shahid.) ..... It is said that up to that time the Hindus
        and Mahomedans alike used to worship in the mosque-
        temple. Since British rule a railing has been put up to
        prevent disputes, within which, in the mosque, the
        Mahomedans pray; while outside the fence the Hindus
        have raised a platform on which they make their
        offerings.
2987.        This report was published in 1870. If we consider
the above observations of P. Carnegy in the light of the
documents placed on record of the corresponding period, i.e.,
1858 to 1885 as discussed above, we find that till 1885 the
property in dispute remained in possession of Hindus in which
they continued to visit for worship. In the alleged riot of 1855
                                                               2826

temporarily Muslims took possession but thereafter the Hindus
regained it. Then the British authorities tried to resolve dispute
by creating a dividing wall sometimes in 1856-57 but it is
evident from the report of 28th November, 1858 and complaint
dated 30th November, 1858 (Exhibit 20, Suit-1) (Register 5,
page 65), that    despite grilled dividing wall erected by the
British authorities restraining Hindus from entering the inner
courtyard, worship by Hindus in the inner courtyard continued
against which complaints were made frequently. Sometimes
when they made some new structure for worship, orders were
passed for removal thereof but whether all such orders were
executed, is not known. Amongst all these things, one thing
which we find missing is mention of Namaz or possession of by
Muslims of the disputed building and/or the property in dispute.
2988.       Even if we assume some truth in what has been said
by P. Carnegy, it does not mean that the property in dispute
(inner courtyard) was in possession of any particular community
or individual. It shows on the contrary that both Hindus and
muslims, freely, frequently and openly were visiting the place in
dispute for worship and that being so this itself belie the claim
of muslim parties in this suit necessitating answer of the issue in
question in negative, i.e., against the defendants.
2989.       The issue in question needs to be answered whether
the muslims being in possession of the property in suit from
1528 AD continuously, openly and to the knowledge of plaintiff
and Hindus in general and if so its effect. Therefore, in order to
get answer of this issue in favour of the defendants at whose
pleading it has been framed, unless it is shown by cogent
material that the muslims came into possession of the property
in suit in 1528 AD, they cannot succeed. As we have already
                                                                   2827

held while discussing issues relating to period of construction,
this itself could not have been proved that the building in
dispute was constructed in 1528 AD, the question of possession
of property in suit in 1528 AD would not arise. No material to
show possession of muslims from 1528 AD atleast till 1855 is
on record. When the first aspect itself is not proved, the further
occasion to suggest that such imaginary possession was
continuous, open, to the knowledge of the plaintiff does not
arise. Moreover the plaintiff could not have the knowledge of
the possession of muslims from 1528 AD since he claimed to be
a mere worshipper at the property in dispute and on this aspect
also the defendants muslim parties have failed to discharge their
burden. The knowledge and opinion need be qua real owner. No
such owner is pleaded. It is suggested that since a lot of
complaints etc. were made by Rajjab Ali and Mohammad
Asghar since November 1858 and onwards, and they were also
sanctioned grant by the British Government for maintenance of
the mosque in respect whereto no Hindu party raised any
objection, hence by the conduct of Hindus, a presumption can
be drawn that the muslims were in possession of the property
since very beginning.
2990.         The conduct of the parties, though is a relevant fact,
but in a title suit cannot succeed simply by referring to one or
the other party, but one has to prove his own case. In M/s
Kamakshi Builders (supra) the Court said:
        "24. . . . . Conduct may be a relevant fact, so as to apply the
        procedural law like estoppel, waiver or acquiescence, but
        thereby no title can be conferred.
        25.   It is now well-settled that time creates title.
        26.   Acquisition of a title is an inference of law arising
                                                                   2828

        out of certain set of facts. If in law, a person does not
        acquire title, the same cannot be vested only by reason of
        acquiescence or estoppel on the part of other.
        28. . . . by reason of presumption alone, the burden is not
        discharged, a title is not created.
        29.   A claim of title by prescription by Respondent No. 1
        again is not tenable. It based its claim on a title. It had,
        therefore, prima facie, no animus possidendi."
2991.         Neither the conduct of the plaintiff or other Hindu
parties can help the defendants nor in the absence of any
evidence to show entry of muslims in property in suit from 1528
AD, we find an occasion to decide issue in question in
affirmance. Though not specifically worded but the ingredients
mentioned in issue 7 (Suit-1) reflects to the claim of adverse
possession taken by the defendants muslim parties (Suit-1). We
have no hesitation in holding that such a claim has not been
proved at all.
2992.         In order to set up a claim based on adverse
possession, it is incumbent upon the person who has set up this
plea to prove that:
        (1) So and so is the owner of the property.
        (2) The defendant is possessing the property from a
        particular date.
        (3) The possession is to the knowledge of the owner,
        hostile, continuous, exclusive, uninterrupted and peaceful
        with an intention of possession i.e. animus possidendi.
        (4) The possession has continued for twelve years and
        more and, therefore, the title of owner stands extinguished
        creating a title by prescription in such defendant.
2993.         Though there are some documents showing the
                                                                 2829

account statements of the Mosque in dispute but the fact
remains that the defendants have completely failed to discharge
burden of proof even prima facie of the facts as pleaded by them
so as to succeed on this issue. Issue No. 7 (Suit-1) is,
accordingly, decided in negative i.e. against the defendant-
Muslim parties.
2994.         Now coming to Issue No. 3 (Suit-3), it has to be
kept in mind that this suit is also confined to the premises within
the inner courtyard and not to the entire premises, i.e., the outer
and inner courtyard including the building. This is what stated
by the counsel for Nirmohi Akhara in his statement made on
17.5.1963 under Order X Rule 1 CPC.
2995.         Sri Sarabjeet Lal, Advocate, counsel for the plaintiff
Suit-3) on 17th May, 1963 got his statement recorded and
besides other said:
        "The present suit is confined to property shown by letters E
        F G H I J K L although the entire area shown by letters E
        F G H P N M L E belongs to the plaintiff."
2996.         He also stated that the plaintiffs are the owner of the
property in dispute and further said:
        "This property is not dedicated to the idol although the
        temple is made on the land which is the birth place of
        Lord Ram. It is owned by the plaintiff and the temple was
        made by the plaintiff."
2997.         There is no averment in the entire plaint that any of
the defendant is the owner of the property in dispute, that the
plaintiffs are having possession of the said property in the
knowledge of the true owner, with an intention to possess it
adversely, i.e., hostile possession, continuous and peaceful.
What is said in para 5, if the muslims attempted to prove that
                                                                2830

they have ever entered it, it would be wrong, they have not been
allowed to enter it atleast ever since the year 1934. The basic
pleadings to claim adverse possession and necessary ingredients
are ex facie absent. Mere long possession does not constitute
adverse possession [See S.M. Karim Vs. Mst. Bibi Sakina
(supra)].
2998.       As already discussed above in detail in order to set
up and succeed on a plea of adverse possession, one has to show
as to who is the true owner, the date from which he is
possessing the property, the knowledge of the true owner of
such possession as also that the possession is hostile and the
possessor has intention to hold possession denying the title of
the true owner or in defiance of the right of the true owner. The
possession is continuous, uninterrupted, peaceful and has
continued for more than 12 years. The entire plaint is
conspicuously missing of all the above kind of pleadings, in the
absence whereof, the plea of adverse possession cannot succeed.
2999.       Moreover the statement of the plaintiff's counsel is
that the property is owned by the plaintiff; the temple is made
by the plaintiffs, hence question of holding property in dispute
in a hostile possession, against true owner, does not arise. It also
show that the plaintiffs (Suit-3) had no animus possidendi. That
is completely absent. In the absence of pleadings, though no
evidence is admissible, but we may add at this stage that no
document whatsoever to support the necessary ingredients of
adverse possession even otherwise had been placed on record by
the plaintiffs (Suit-3). Most of the evidence is in respect to the
structures which are in the outer courtyard and the right and
possession of the plaintiffs on the said property in the last
several decades. But so far as the inner courtyard is concerned,
                                                                2831

only oral evidence has been produced and the attempt also had
been to show that they use to visit the premises in the inner
courtyard to offer worship of Ram Lala's idol thereat and that
Pujaris of Nirmohi Akhara used to perform Sewa thereat. We
have discussed these witnesses and it has been demonstrated
that virtually all of them on this aspect lack creditworthiness,
hence unreliable.
3000.         A lot of documentary evidences have also been filed
by the plaintiff (Suit-3) in support of his claim for possession,
but we find that the same do not help the plaintiff (Suit-3) for
throwing light in respect to the premises within inner courtyard.
Most of the documents are of the period subsequent to the date
of attachment and they are concerned with the premises in outer
courtyard. These are:
        (A) Exhibit M1 (Suit-4) (Register Vol. 17, page 7) is a
        copy of the application dated 11.06.1956 of Abhiram Das
        addressed to Additional District Magistrate, Faizabad in
        Case No. 58/73 seeking his permission for change of
        thatch.
        (B) Exhibit M2 (Suit-4) (Register Vol. 17, page 9) is a
        copy of the order dated 26.06.1956 passed by the
        Additional District Magistrate, Faizabad to the following
        effect:
                    "S.O. Ayodhya
                    There is no objection if the thatch is repaired.
              Please inform the applicant."
        (C) Exhibit M3 (Suit-4) (Register Vol. 17, page 11) is a
        copy of the application dated 21.12.1962 by Abhiram Das
        addressed to the City Magistrate, Faizabad seeking
        permission of celebrating anniversary from 21s to 29th
                                                         2832

December, 1962 in the disputed site.
(D) Exhibit M4 (Suit-4) (Register Vol. 17, page 13) is a
copy of the report of Sri Priya Dutt Ram, Receiver of the
disputed premises addressed to the City Magistrate,
Faizabad and it reads as under:
             "I am connected with only the premises under
        dispute within the railings and the walls on the so-
        called Anniversary Day, only two vedic Pundits enter
        it, and perform HAWAN on a temporary clay after,
        and the same should be allowed this year as well.
             As far as function outside the premises, they
        have no concern with me.
             Of course, it is in my knowledge that on so-
        called Anniversary Day, some functions were
        organized by Sri Abhiram Dass and also by the
        Janambhumi Sewa Samity for the last five years, I
        have been out of Faizabad."
(E) Exhibit M5 (Suit-4) (Register Vol. 17, page 15) is a
copy of the order dated 21.12.1962 passed by the District
Magistrate, Faizabad allowing the applicant Abhiram Das
to hold the Ramayan Path and religious ceremonies in the
ground of Janambhumi temple from 21st to 29th December,
1962.
(F) Exhibit M6 (Suit-4) (Register Vol. 17, page 17) is a
copy of the order dated 26.12.1962 of Sri S.N. Sharma,
the then City Magistrate, Faizabad on an application filed
by Sri Abhiram Das directing S.O. Ayodhya to take steps
for maintaining law and order in the observance of
religious function by Sri Abhiram Das in the ground of
Janambhumi temple and one Baba Baldev Das at Sumitra
                                                          2833

Bhawan and to prevent any disturbance from Baba Baldev
Das at the Janambhumi temple site.
(G) Exhibit M7 (Suit-4) (Register Vol. 17, page 29) is a
copy of Khatauni 1374 Fasli which has been filed to show
that some land was gifted by worshipper in the name of
Janambhumi Ayodhya in respect whereto the entries were
made in khatauni in December, 1967. The aforesaid land
situate at Tahsil Navabganj, District Kunda.
(H) Exhibit 2 (Suit-3) (Register Vol. 9, page 49) is a copy
of the order dated 9.2.1961 of City Magistrate, Faizabad
permitting replacement of the covers or sirki covers by the
sheets on the applicant's own land uncovered by
attachment provided it is in accordance with the laws of
Municipality. Sri R.L. Verma submitted that this shows
continue possession of plaintiff (Suit-3) on the disputed
land but we do not find anything to fortify the above
submission in the above document and in our view it is
not relevant for the purpose of suit in question.
(I) Exhibit 3 (Suit-3) (Register Vol. 9, page 51) is a copy
of some certificate issued by Municipality Board,
Faizabad. The document is torn and the handwriting part
therein is illegible. In our view, such a document cannot
be relied or accepted for any purpose. In any case, one of
the remark contained therein is as under:
            "(3) There will arise no right of ownership over
      the land from this certificate on which permission is
      granted to build the house or building but the
      applicant himself will be responsible of all sort of
      dispute whatever may arise in respect of title."
      This remark is self speaking and, therefore, lends no
                                                         2834

credence to the plaintiffs (Suit-3).
(J) Exhibit 4 (Suit-3) (Register Vol. 9, page 53-57)
contains two copies of the Architect's map and a
certificate no. 397 dated 6th September 1963 of Executive
Officer, Municipal Board, Faizabad for the period
25.3.1964 to 24.3.1965 permitting some construction
pertaining to tin shed. It is sought to argue that since Ram
Chabutara was in the possession of the plaintiff (Suit-3),
they were also permitted to make construction thereon by
Municipal Board, Ayodhya. In any case, it pertains to
outer courtyard.
(K) Exhibit 5 (Suit-3) (Register Vol. 9, page 59) is a copy
of the letter dated 6.2.1961 submitted by Vedanti Rajaram
Chandracharya      to   the   City     Magistrate,   Faizabad
complaining that they have been permitted by Nagar
Palika, Faizabad to place a tin shed on the outer side of
Janambhumi but the Police is preventing it and says that
they have no authority. Therefore, the Police may be
directed not to create any obstruction in the said function.
(L) Exhibit 6 (Suit-3) (Register Vol. 9, page 61-64) is a
copy of the application dated 27.9.1950/29.12.1950
against the order passed by the City Magistrate under
Section 145 Cr.P.C.
(M) Exhibit 7 (Suit-3) (Register Vol. 9, page 65-67) is a
copy of the order dated 30.7.1953 passed by Sri Prem
Shankar, City Magistrate, Faizabad for consigning record
of 145 Cr.P.C. proceeding since the civil suit was already
pending and, therefore, he directed that subject to further
orders in those matter or when the temporary injunction is
vacated till then the proceedings are being consigned to
                                                                2835

        record.
3001.         Some documents of an earlier period have also been
filed but they also show an arrangement made by the plaintiff
(Suit-3) outside the inner courtyard rather outside the premises
in dispute and, therefore, do not help the plaintiff (Suit-3) for
deciding the issue in question in their favour. These are:
        (A) Exhibit 8 (Suit-3) (Register Vol. 9, page 69) is a copy
        of the agreement permitting Jhingoo son of Gaya for
        providing drinking water to the pilgrimages visiting
        Ramjanambhumi site at Ayodhya. It is said to be written
        on 11.6.1900.
        (B) Exhibit 9 (Suit-3) (Register Vol. 9, page 73-75) is a
        copy of agreement of Theka Shop of Janambhumi Ramkot
        Ayodhya by Gopal son of Babu in favour of Narottamdas
        on 13.10.1942.
        (C) Exhibit 10 (Suit-3) (Register Vol. 9, page 77-79) is a
        copy of the agreement dated 29.10.1945 regarding Theka
        Shop in favour of Narottamdas.
        (D) Exhibit 12 (Suit-3) (Register Vol. 9, page 93 to 99) is
        a copy of the judgment dated 22.10.1923 of Additional
        Subordinate Judge, Faizabad in Appeal No. 10 of 1923
        Mahant Narottamdas Vs. Ramswaroop Das. It appears that
        a suit claiming possession over a plot no. 163 measuring 2
        bigha 2 biswa was raised but the said suit was dismissed
        by the Trial Court vide judgment dated 22.10.1923. It is
        unrelated with disputed site. The order of the Court said as
        under:
              "Judgment
                    The applt as Mahant & manager of the temple
              Janam Asthan alias Janam Bhumi, Akhara Nirmohi
                                                     2836

situat in M. Kot Ramchandar, Ajudhya sued the
respdt in the Court of the Munsif of Fyzabad for the
recovery of possession of 3 bis. 17 bisw. land out of a
plot no. 163 measuring 2 big 3 bis situate in M. Kot
Ramchandar, Ajudhya Parg. Haweli Oudh on the
allegations that he was the owner for the said plot as
being in possession of the same since a long time.
That in Dec. 1921 the deft wrongfully dispossessed
the plff appt out of the aforesaid land in building A
compound with a chabutra (platform) thereon. Hence
the suit.
      The respdt admitted the building of a
compound & chabutra on the plot in question but
denied the claim. He pleaded that the applt had no
right in the land in suit nor had he ever been in
possession of the same. That the land in suit
appertained to the temple of Mast Ram as its
sahan. That it belonged to Mast Ram, who was in
possession of the same. That Bhagwan Das & Gopal
Das chelas of Mahant Mast Ram gave the land in suit
to Bhagwan Das Udasi chela of Mahanta Madho
Ramji by a registered deed dated 25th Oct.. 1892.
That Bhagwan Das Udasi gave the land in suit to
Narayan Das by a registered deed dated 11th
January, 1896. That (Narayan Das) on the death of
Narayan Das, the deft as his chela was in possession
of the land in suit. That the deft & his predecessors in
interest had been in adverse proprietary possession
of the land in suit for the last 30 years. That the claim
was barred by time & plff had not right to sue. The
                                                    2837

plff applt in his replication said that the land in suit
marked red in the plan drawn by the amin appointed
for the purpose was all along parti land till the deft
made the chabutra in dispute. That the land in suit
belonged to the nazul and the plff or mahant of the
Janam Ashthan & his predecessors had all along
been in possession and in leased his title on
possession. That no lease from the nazul had been
taken. The deft denied the land in suit to have ever
belonged to the nazul department. The learned
Munsif dismissed the claim. The plff has preferred
this appeal on various grounds taken in the
memorandum of appeal. Now the main point for
determination in this appeal is whether the plff has
been in possession of the land in suit for a long time
and as such is he entitled to recover possession from
the deft.
      It is admitted by the plff that the land in suit
belongs to the nazul & that no lease has been
taken from the nazul. The deft is admittedly now in
possession of the land in suit. Under these
circumstances the plff cannot sue the deft for
possession, because possession is, in general, a
good title against all but the true owner, i.e. the
nazul Department.
      Again it is admitted by the plff in his
replication that the land in suit was all along parti
land till the deft made the chabutra in dispute. Now
the land in suit bring admittedly parti land, the plff
cannot acquire any right in it by placing a takht on it
                                                               2838

        as he swear. The deft, therefore,            who is in
        possession, may not have an indefeasible right as
        against the nazul, has yet a better right than the plff
        & therefore he may set up the right of the nazul with
        land in suit in order to disprove that of the plff.
              Besides the plff evidence goes to show that his
        lessee used to keep their shops just in front of the
        Janam Ashthan gate (vide evidence of PW1).
        Assuming that the plff was in possession of any
        portion of the plot no. 163 by leasing the same to the
        sellers of flowers & batashas he cannot be in
        possession of the land in suit thereby, because the
        front of the Janam Ashthan is a long way off the land
        in suit as is shown by the amin's plan inasmuch as it
        has been held that a wrong-two rights by adverse
        possession must be confined to the land of which he
        is in actual possession. The plff has not been proved
        to be in actual possession of the land in suit. It may
        be in actual possession of a portion of the plot no.
        163 on portion of which is the land in suit, just in
        front of the Janam Ashthan gate, but the land in suit
        far off the front of the said gate. Hence his rights
        be confined to the portion of the plot no. 163 just
        in front of the Janam Ashthan gate & not to the
        land in suit. Under these circumstances I am of
        opinion that this appeal must fail. I therefore
        dismissing the appeal with costs confirm the decree
        of the Court below. Order 41 rule 30 C.P.C.
                                  22/10/23 Mahmud Hussain"
3002.   There are some other documents which, in our view,
                                                                   2839

cannot be considered as an evidence in favour of the plaintiff
(Suit-3) i.e. Exhibit 1 (Suit-3) (Register Vol. 9, page 15-47),
being a copy of the agreement said to be executed by Panches of
Nirmohi Akhara on 19.3.1949 duly registered in Sub-Registrar's
office, Faizabad. This lays down about the constitution,
functioning etc. of Nirmohi Akhara.
3003.         Whatever is stated in the above document is
something to which the defendants are not party at all and,
therefore, on the question of title or possession, the above
document, in our view, is not relevant.
3004.         Some documents have been filed to show that the
land in dispute was recorded in revenue records as Nazul land
and the name of Mahant of plaintiff (Suit-3), i.e. Mahant
Raghubar Das was directed to be entered showing that he was in
possession of the entire property in dispute, which are:
        (A) Exhibit 11 (Suit-3) (Register Vol. 9, page 89) is a
        copy of the Nazul department's certificate dated 30.10.22
        stating that the land belong to Nazul and the plaintiff as
        Mahant of Janamsthan and his predecessors have all along
        been in possession and he has title or possession.
        (B)   Exhibit 52 (Suit-4) (Register Vol. 12, page 347 to
        352) is a certified copy of the Khasra abadi of Mauza
        Ramkot, Ayodhya 1931 AD issued by Nazul Office,
        Faizabad in February, 1990.
        (C) Exhibit 49 (Suit-4) (Register Vol. 11, page 271 to
        329) is the copy of the nakal khasra Abadi, Kot Ram
        Chandra, pergana Haveli Awadh, Tahasil and District
        Faizabad of 1931 A.D. of nazul register. At page 311, the
        Hindi transliteration of the aforesaid Exhibit, original
        whereof is in Urdu, the entry of plot 583 is as under :
                                                                  2840

^^uke egy ¼1½ %      efLtn vgns 'kkgh
uEcj vkjkth ¼2@1½ %        583
jdck tnhn ¼2@2½ % 305@ 9 fc0 15 fclokalh 4 dN0
uEcj lkfcd ¼3@1½ %         vkcknh 444
jdck lkfcd ¼3@2½ %         7 fc0 11 fclokalh 14 dN0
uke ekfyd vkyk ¼4½ %         &
uke ekrgrnkj vxj dksbZ gks ¼5½ % &
uke dkfct gky ¼6½ %        efLtn oDQ vgns 'kkgh
fdLe ¼7½ %     elkftn
jdck ¼8½ %     9 fc0 15 fclokalh 4 dN0
vfyQ cvnk;s yxku ¼2½ fcyk yxku ¼9½ %
                      ctfj;s fefly uEcjh 427 ua0 6@ 47
                      jk;xat equQlyk 26 Qjojh lu~ 41 bZ0
                      nkf[ky [kkfjt cuke egUr jÄqukFk nkl
                      egUr tue LFkku eqdjZj fd;s x;s
                                                ctk;s jkepju nkl
                                                       n0dk0
                                                       14-6-41
d.Mgy ¼10½ %
nLr vankth ¼11½ %
eqjyl e; rkjh[k ¼12½ %
jdck ¼13½ %
yxku ¼14½ %
[ksr uEcjh ¼15½ %
dSfQ;y ¼16½ %&       efLtn iks[rk oD+Q+ vgns 'kkgh vUnj lgu
                     efLtn ,d pcwrjk ¼viBuh;½ tks tueHkwfe ds
                     uke ls e'kgwj gS nj[rku xwyj ,d beyh ,d
                     ewyfljh ,d] ihiy ,d] csy ,d ¼viBuh;½
                     efLtn ekSlwek 'kkg ckcj 'kkg ejgwe^^
       (Note : Though the original document is horizontal,
but for the purpose of convenience, it has been typed
vertically.)
                                                                2841

        On page 331, Nazul khasra map's copy has also been filed,
which is part of the Exhibit 49.
3005.        It is no doubt true and also admitted by the parties
that the land in dispute commencing from the first settlement of
1861 AD has been mentioned as Nazul and there is no change in
its status. It is also evident from Exhibit-49 (Suit-4) that in plot
no. 583 and the area mentioned therein, name of Mahant
Raghubar Das was directed to be mutated in place of Ram
Charan Das by order dated 6th February, 1941 but this by itself,
in our view, would not be conclusive evidence to show that the
entire property possessed by plaintiff (Suit-3), particularly when
the details of property in respect whereto the mutation was
observed is also mentioned in Clause 16 which refers to the
construction in outer courtyard and even outside the premises in
dispute.
3006.        There is an Auditor's report, i.e., Exhibit 32 (Suit-4)
(Register 11 Page 177) for the period 1947-48, but that
document, in our view does not help the plaintiff (Suit-3) for
adjudication of the issues in question.
3007.        A copy of the F.I.R. Dated 23rd December 1949 has
been filed by the plaintiff which shows the placement of idols
inside the inner courtyard and it goes against the plaintiff.
Exhibit 51 (Suit-4) (Register Vol. 12, page 337 to 338) is a
copy of the FIR No. 167 dated 23rd December 1949 under
Sections 147, 295, 448 I.P.C. alleging the placement of idols
under the central dome of the disputed building in the night of
22/23.12.1949. The FIR was registered on the information given
by Pandit Ramdev Dubey, Sub-Inspector, In-charge Police
Station, Ayodhya, District Faizabad.
3008.        Showing the system and functioning of Nirmohi
                                                                              2842

Akhara, a document has been filed by the plaintiff (Suit-3)
which, in our view, is not relevant at all, i.e. Exhibit 80 (Suit-4)
(Register Vol. 16, pages 59-64) which is photocopy of the title
page, introduction and pages no. 1 to 6 of "Srimaddev Murari Ji
Ki Jeevani Tatha Sri Guru Parampara Prakash" 1994 Edn. by Sri
Ram Tahal Das Ji. Page 5 of this work shows that in Samvat
1729 (1672AD) Sri Balanand Ji established Akharas.
3009.          The defendants, on the contrary, have filed certain
documents, which are also of subsequent period, i.e, post 1950
to show that plaintiff could not have been in possession of the
inner courtyard as they could enter the same with the permission
of Receiver only.
3010.          Exhibit A-12 (Suit-4) (Register Vol. 16, pages 120-
123) is a copy of the statement of Sri Abhiram Das dated
18.3.1978 recorded by District Judge, Faizabad and para 3
thereof reads as under:
        ^3--   tUe Hkwfe efUnj esa iwtk iqtkjh djrk Fkk eU= vkSj cksyrk FkkA
        eU= cksyus okys dk uke y{e.k nRr 'kkluh iq= vfEcdk ikaMs gS tks
        ;gkWa vnkyr esa [kM+s gSaA ogkWa 'kq: esa ckcw fiz;k nRr jke dh fu;qfDr esa
        iqtkjh Fkk fof"Vkn~;= 'kSyh ds eryc gS fd ge Hkxoku dh iwtk ds
        le; Hkxoku] ek;k vkSj tho rhuksa dh Hkkouk dh tkrh gS vkSj oSfnd
        eU= cksyrs gSaA vkSj Hkxoku ds Luku ls ysdj lksyg izdkj dh iwtk
        gksrh gS ;g iwtk ,d vkneh }kjk ugha gks ldrhA vxj iqtkjh dks eU=
        ekywe gS rks oDr iM+us ij ogh iwtk dj ldrk gSA efUnj ds vUnj
        iz o s' k djus ds fy;s ijeh'ku dk vf/kdkj ckcw fiz ; k nRr
        jke dk s FkkA**
3011.          After attachment, the Receiver took charge and
obviously thereafter none could have entered the attached
portion without permission of Receiver or the Court.
3012.          Some further documents filed by the defendants,
which, in our view, not relevant, are:
                                                                 2843

        (A) Exhibit A-14 (Suit-4) (Register Vol. 16, pages 143-
        146) is a certified copy of objection dated 16.7.1982 of Sri
        Dharam Das filed before Additional District Magistrate
        (Administration/Nazul Officer) Faizabad in mutation
        proceeding no. 101/133/26/866. It was mentioned therein
        that there is a public temple in the disputed premises
        where the existing temple was constructed about 450 years
        ago at the commencement of Mughal emperor and since
        then, it is a subject matter of dispute between Hindus and
        Muslims. Rest of the part is not relevant for our purposes.
        (B)   Exhibit A-15 (Suit-4) (Register Vol. 16, pages 150-
        153) is a copy of affidavit dated 16.7.1982 of Dharam Das
        before   the   Nazul     Officer,   Faizabad   in   mutation
        proceeding. It is almost a true copy of Exhibit A-14.
        (C) Exhibit A-3 (Suit-4) (Register Vol. 16, pages 136-
        142) is a certified copy of FIR against Dharam Das under
        Section 395 I.P.C. in Case Crime No. 87 dated 17.2.1982.
        We, however, find no relevance of the said document with
        the issue in question.
3013.         There are some documents, which contain some
judgements etc. of criminal proceedings, which have been filed
to show that in the matters related to the premises in dispute,
some proceedings were initiated against Mahant of Nirmohi
Akhara showing that Nirmohi Akhara was in possession of
entire premises in dispute, i.e.:
        (A) Exhibit C-2 (Register 24, Page 13-22) is a copy of the
        judgment dated 03.08.1957 passed by Sri R.K.Sercar, Ist
        Addl. Sessions Judge, Fyzabad in Criminal Appeal No.50
        of 1951 (Bhashkar Dass Vs. State). This appeal was
        preferred against the order of Shri R.B.Saxena, sentencing
                                                      2844

the appellant Bhaskar Das to one month simple
imprisonment and fine of Rs.50/-. The appeal was allowed
and the conviction order was set aside.
(B) Exhibit C3 ( (Suit-5) (Register 24 Page 23-28) is a
copy of the order dated 5th September, 1966 passed by Sri
B.S.Shukla, City Magistrate, Faizabad in Case No.533 of
1966 (State Vs. Prem Das & Others) under Section
107/117 Cr.P.C. The allegation pertains to the disturbance
created by the accused persons at Ram Janam Bhumi on
25th March, 1966 on account of a dispute regarding
Pujariship and possession of Ram Janam Bhumi Ayodhya.
(C) Exhibit C4 (Suit 5) (Register 24, Page 29-36) is a
copy of the judgment dated 22.10.1923 of Additional
Sessions Judge, Faizabad in Civil Appeal No.10 of 1923
(Mahant Narottam Das Vs. Ram Swaroop Das). The
aforesaid appeal was filed against the judgment dated 12th
December, 1922 of Sub Judge, Fyzabad dismissing the
suit with costs. The appeal was also dismissed.
(D) Exhibit C7 (Register 24, Page 54-56) is a copy of the
judgment dated 13th May, 1983 of K.K.Singh, IV Addl.
Sessions Judge, Faizabad in Criminal Revision No.60 of
1982 (Dharam Das Vs. Sri Panch Rama Nandi Nirmohi
Akhara through Ram Kewal Das & 2 others). The revision
was filed against the City Magistrate, Faizabad order
dated 6th March, 1982 under Section 145 Cr.P.C.
(E) Exhibit C8 (Suit-5) (Register 24, Page 57-71) is a
copy of the Commissioner's report dated 13.10.1973
submitted by Sri Pareshwari Dutt Pandey, Advocate
Commissioner in Original Suit No.9 of 1973 (Nirmohi
Akhara Vs. Ram Lakhan Saran Das) in the Court of Civil
                                                               2845

        Judge, Faizabad. The Commissioner has also submitted a
        map which included the disputed site also.
        (F) Exhibit C9 (Suit 5) (Register 24, Page 73-77) is a
        copy of written statement dated 29th December, 1950
        submitted by Baba Abhay Ram Das in the proceedings
        under Section 145 Cr.P.C. before the City Magistrate,
        Faizabad. In para 6 thereof Abhay Ram Das has said that
        outside the disputed premises there is some land and
        building which is property of Nirmohi Akahara which
        they are entitled to use being in possession. In para 8 it
        says that no muslim has entered the disputed premises
        since 1935 and no prayer has been offered by them.
        (G) Exhibit C11 (Suit-5) (Register 24, Page 99-101) is a
        copy of the notice dated 22.12.1934 published by Sri
        J.P.Nikalsan, District Magistrate, Faizabad with respect to
        the fine imposed under Section 15A(2) of the Police Act
        and for its realization from the Hindu resident of
        Ayodhya.
3014.        However, we do not find that the said judgements
are admissible and relevant for the issue in question in view of
the law laid down in Seth Ramdayal Jat Vs. Laxmi Prasad
AIR 2009 SC 2463, which we have already discussed above.
3015.        Another set of documents, i.e. Exhibit C1, C5, C6,
C10, brief details whereof is as under, are also not much
relevant to the point in issue:
        (A) Exhibit C1 (Suit-5) (Register 24 Page 11) is a
        photocopy of the charge certificate dated 5th January 1950
        by Priya Dutt Ram Receiver.
        (B) Exhibit C5 (Suit 5) (Register 24, Page 37-45) is a
        copy of the plaint in suit no.426 of 1989 (Mahant Ram
                                                               2846

        Gopal Das & others Vs. Ashok Singhal & Others) filed in
        Court of Civil Judge Fyzabad. The above suit was decided
        on 04.12.1991.
        (C) Exhibit C6 (Suit 5) (Register 24, Page 47-51) is a
        copy of a Commissioner's report dated 08.11.1989 in O.S.
        No.426 of 1989 (Mahant Gopaldas & Others Vs. Vishwa
        Hindu Parishad & Others) submitted by Sri Uma Kant
        Malviya, Court Amin, Civil Court, Faizabad.
        (D) Exhibit C10 (Suit-5) (Register 24,        Page 81-92)
        claims to be a copy of the statement of expenditure from
        December, 1985 to April, 1987 incurred by Sri Ram
        Janmabhumi Nyas and also contains some details of the
        said trust.
3016.         These documents also, in our view, do not lend any
help to the plaintiff (Suit-3). Even otherwise fail to serve any
purpose for adjudication of the issue in question with respect to
possession either way.
3017.         On behalf of defendants, it was pointed out that
other Hindu parties have also supported their claim that the idol
under the central dome inside the inner courtyard was placed in
the night of 22nd/23rd December, 1949, meaning thereby till then
there could not have been any occasion of possession for
Nirmohi Akhara, hence, the question of possession or loss of
possession of the premises within the inner courtyard for the last
12 years does not arise at all. In this regard, the argument of Sri
P.N. Mishra in respect to Register 3 was pointed out, which was
as under:
        (A) Record of proceedings of Suit-2 (contained in Register
        3) which has already been dismissed as withdrawn was
        referred by Sri Mishra. He sought to rely on the written
                                                             2847

statement filed therein on behalf of the defendant No.1 to
5 i.e. Zahoor Ahmad, Haji Feku, Haji Mohd. Faiq, Mohd.
Shami and Mohd. Achhan Miya dated 18th January, 1951
(Page 41-46 Register Vol. 3) to show that it has
consistently been the case of the Muslim parties that
Namaz was offered in the disputed building till 16th
December, 1949 and he strongly relied on para 22 thereof
which read as under:
     ^^nQk 22- ;g fd eqn~nkvysgqe eqthc dks bYe ugha gS fd
     tk;nkn eqrnkfo;k ;kuh efLtn ckcjh ds vUnj dksbZ ewfrZ gS- 16
     fnlEcj lu~ 1949 bZ0 rd mlesa uekt gqbZ- ml oDr rd ml
     es dksbZ ewfrZ u Fkh ysfdu vxj dksbZ ewfrZ efLtn ds vUnj fdlh
     'k[l us pksjh o cnfu;rh ls ckn rkjh[k etdwj j[k fn;k gS- rks
     mlls efLtn dh ljhgh csgqjerh o ukikdh eqrlfOoj gS- vkSj
     Qsy etdwj dkuwuu eqtfjekuk gS- vkSj vxj eqn~nbZ ;k dksbZ
     nwljk 'k[l efLtn etdwj esa ewfrZ iwtus ;k n'kZu djus ds x+jt
     ls efLtn ds vUnj nkf[ky gksuk pkgrk gS rks og tqeZ dk
     eqrZfdc gS- pqukps ,slh gkyr es vnkyr nhokuh nknjlh erywck
     nsus ls dkflj gS- cgj gky mlls eqn~nbZ ;k fdlh xSj eqfLye
     dks efLtn etdwj es dksbZ gd ugha iSnk gks ldrkA^^
     "Section 22. The respondent Mujib has no knowledge
     of any idol in this controversial building that is Babri
     Masjid. Upto December 16, 1949 Namaj was offered
     in it upto that time there was no Murti. But after that
     if any person with wrong intentions, has placed one,
     it would be considered as desecration and would be
     treated as a criminal act and if the petitioner or any
     other person enters the Masjid with the intention of
     doing Puja of the idol or for Darshan, it would be
     considered as a criminal act. Therefore in such
     circumstances the civil court cannot provide any
                                                                2848

             relief. However as a result of this the petitioner or
             any non Muslims would have no right in the Masjid."
             (E.T.C.)
        (B) He (Sri Mishra) submitted that for the first time the
        stand was changed when suit 4 was filed and that changed
        stand continued thereafter, as is also evident from the
        written statement filed on 11.5.1989 (Page 125-141
        Register 3) on behalf of U.P.Sunni Central Wakf Board in
        Suit 2 wherein in para 22 he tried to explain his earlier
        stand to bring in Suit 4 within the period of limitation.
        Para 22 reads as under:
             "That the muslims have remained regularly offering
             prayers in the mosque in question upto 22.12.1949
             and Friday prayers were also offered upto
             16.12.1949 and as such the idols kept in the mosque
             in a stealthy and mischievous manner in the night of
             22nd/23rd December, 1949 will not confer any right or
             title upon the plaintiff or upon anyone else to perform
             Pooja in the said mosque."
3018.        Referring to the above submissions, it is said that
even if it is found that Namaz was last offered in the inner
courtyard on 16th December, 1949, it rule out any possibility of
claim of possession of the plaintiff (suit-3). Learned counsel for
the parties submitted that the record of Suit-2 has not been
detached since the evidence was filed collectively after clubbing
all the suits.
3019.        Register 4 contains Exhibit- 1 to 15 (Suit-2). The
said documents have been retained in view of the order passed
by this Court while dismissing Suit 2 as withdrawn since all the
suits were proceeding collectively and the evidence were
                                                                2849

allowed to be adduced and relied on interchangeably. It contains
exhibits 1 to 15 filed by plaintiffs (suit 2). However, none of the
party has placed reliance on any of the said documents during
the course of the argument, therefore, we refrain from referring
any of the above document of Register 4.
3020.          Register 5 contains 34 exhibits filed by plaintiffs
(Suit 1). Exhibits 1 to 14 are copies of the affidavits/ statements
filed by certain Muslims before the Magistrate in proceedings
under Section 145 Cr.P.C. wherein they have admitted that since
1935 Muslims have not offered any Namaz in the disputed
building and it is continuously in possession of the Hindus and
also they have no objection in case the disputed building is
handed over to Hindus. The aforesaid documents to the extent to
prove the fact that the same were filed before the Magistrate and
constitute part of the record of 145 Cr.P.C. proceeding before
the City Magistrate is not disputed but to believe the contents
thereof, in our view, it was necessary to produce the authors of
the documents and to give an opportunity of cross-examination
to the other parties against whose interest the documents contain
certain averments. None of the author of the said documents
have produced and they are also not party to the proceedings
individually. We have no benefit of testifying the correctness of
the contents of the said documents. In the absence of any one
available to prove the contents of the said documents, in our
view, the same cannot be relied and therefore, nothing turn out
from the aforesaid documents either in favour or against any of
the parties.
3021.          The question as to whether the idols were kept in the
disputed structure under the central dome on 22nd/23rd
December, 1949 or were already there, has been considered and
                                                                 2850

decided above, and, therefore, in view of those findings, it
cannot be said that the plaintiff (Suit-3) possessed the premises
in dispute in the capacity as Shebait or manager or owner twelve
years prior to the date of accrual of cause of action.
3022.       Some of the Hindu parties including plaintiffs (Suit-
5) have taken a categorical stand that the idols were placed
inside the building under central dome in the inner courtyard in
the night of 22/23 December, 1949. OPW 1, witness produced
by the plaintiffs (Suit-5) though has made statement to much
extent in favour of the plaintiff (Suit-3) in respect to various
other aspects, but so far as the inner courtyard is concerned,
about the idols, he has also joined stand with the plaintiffs (Suit-
5). This issue we have already decided and, therefore, need not
to discuss further hereat. But what at this stage we say is that
issue 3 (Suit-3) was the responsibility of the plaintiffs (Suit-3) to
prove, which they have miserably failed.
3023.       Whatever the evidence has been produced by the
plaintiffs (Suit-3), none has said anything about the adverse
possession of the plaintiff and that too in regard to premises in
inner courtyard. Twenty witnesses have been produced but even
a single one has not uttered a word about adverse possession of
plaintiffs on the suit property. Adverse possession is a question
of fact. It has to be specifically pleaded and proved. In the
absence of proper pleading, evidence, oral or documentary, the
claim of title based on adverse possession neither can be
entertained nor can be accepted.
3024.       Besides, when the plaintiffs have stated that they are
the owner of the property in dispute and the disputed structure
which according to the plaintiffs (Suit-3) was a temple, owned
by them, the question of entertaining the plea of adverse
                                                                 2851

possession does not arise at all. In any case, the assertion of the
plaintiff that the defendants have never entered the premises in
dispute since 1934 pre supposes that prior to 1934 their entry in
the disputed premises is admitted. With regard to the period
subsequent to 1934, we find that the evidence placed by the
plaintiff (Suit-3) did not prove that the defendant-Muslim
parties could never enter the premises in dispute till its
attachment by the Magistrate under Section 145 Cr.P.C. This
aspect we have already considered in detail while discussing
Issue No. 12 (Suit-4) and Issue No. 3 (a) (Suit-5) and have
recorded a finding that in all probabilities Namaz in the building
in dispute i.e. inner courtyard was offered on 16th December,
1949. In view of the above, we have no hesitation in deciding
Issue No. 3 (Suit-3) in negative i.e. against the plaintiff.
3025.       Issue No. 8 (Suit-3) is virtually a reversal of the
previous one. It is based on the plea of the defendant muslim
parties that the property in dispute is in their possession since its
very inception and, therefore, if the plaintiffs have any right
whatsoever, it has extinguished due to expiry of more than 400
years since the date when the Babari mosque was constructed
i.e. 1528 AD.
3026.       At the outset we would like to mention that question
of extinction of right of plaintiff would arise only if they have
such right. On the one hand the plaintiffs have miserably failed
to prove any title or ownership in respect to the property in
dispute and secondly they themselves have pleaded acquisition
of title by adverse possession on account whereof issue no. 3
(Suit-3) has been framed but having failed therein, in our view,
the question of conferring a right upon the defendants, as a
result of extinction of such illusory right of the plaintiff, would
                                                               2852

not arise. This issue in effect is in reference to Section 27 of LA
1908 which is not attracted.
3027.       Besides others, two documents are heavily relied by
the defendant-Muslim parties on this issue i.e. the judgments in
Suit-1885 as well as dated 30.3.1946 of Civil Judge, Faizabad in
Regular Suit No. 29 of 1945, Shia Central Board of Wakf Vs.
Sunni Central Board of Wakf (Exhibit A-42, Suit-1) (Register 8,
Pages 431-432). It is contended that Mahant Raghubar Das in
Suit-1885 had not disputed that on the west side of Chabutara,
there was a Mosque and the District Judge, Faizabad on his spot
inspection found that the said mosque was constructed more
than 300 years ago by Babar, the said observation is nothing but
his finding which had not been disturbed in the Second Appeal
by the Judicial Commissioner and, hence, the claim of the
defendant-Muslims parties on the said Mosque since 1528 is
duly proved. The plaintiffs cannot wriggle of the said judgment
and findings recorded therein, to stress upon their claim
otherwise. Referring to the judgment dated 30.3.1946 it is
contended that there also the Civil Judge has recorded a finding
that the Mosque was constructed by Babar and not by Mir Baki
in 1528 and that being a finding recorded in a judgment, which
is judgment in rem, the issue stands closed for all purposes. The
defendants' claim on the Mosque since 1528, therefore, is duly
proved.
3028.       The effect of the judgment in Suit-1885 we have
already discussed in detail while considering the issues relating
to res judicata, estoppel etc. Without going in details and
repeating all the things again, suffice is to mention that Mahant
Raghubar Das sought permission to make a temple on Ram
Chabutara, which existed in the outer courtyard measuring
                                                                  2853

21"X17" and for the said permission filed the aforesaid Suit.
There was no dispute about the nature of any structure in the
vicinity and other connected issues as to who constructed it,
when it was constructed etc. Whatever has been observed by the
District Judge in his judgment, cannot be said to be a finding on
an issue since there was no such issue at all and, hence, the same
would not help the defendant-Muslim parties in the present
suits.
3029.          Various authorities on the question of res judicata
we have already referred to above, but since for the purpose of
the issue in question again those very documents have been
relied, we propose to give more authorities on the subject which
make the things further clear as to how such observation cannot
be treated to be an adjudication of an issue creating a right in the
party.
3030.          In Prosunno Kumari Debya Vs. Golab Chand
(supra), the Judicial Committee said that to attract the principle
of res judicata one has to see that necessary and proper issues
were raised, tried and decided in suit and the decree is untainted
by fraud or collusion.
3031.          In Profulla Chandra Vs. Prabartak Trust AIR
1954 Cal. 8, in para 15, 16, 18, 19 and 20, the Court observed:
               "Res judicata or as it is also sometimes called Res
         Adjudicata literally means "the thing adjudged", and the
         doctrine known by that name rests on the principle that a
         matter, once adjudged cannot be reopend. In its practical
         application the doctrine or the rule of res judicata bars the
         trial of an issue, previously decided. In essence, therefore,
         the rule postulates a previous decision or adjudication & a
         recurrence of the matter of issue, there or then adjudiced
                                                            2854

or decided. It is the decision or adjudication which
operates as res judicata ..... In the application, therefore, of
the rule as res judicata, what matters is the decision and
not the reasoning of the Court and one requirement of the
rule is the identity of the issue or eadem questio. ...... As
pointed out by Bankes L. J. in the case of --'Jones v. Lewis
(1919) 1 KB 328 (A), it is the "decision and not the reason
of the decision"- which operates as res judicata. This is
clearly supported by the pronouncement of the Judicial
Committee in the case of -'Broken Hill Proprietary Co. Ltd.
v. Municipal Council of Broken Hill, (1926) AC 94 (B)
.....the plea of res judicata succeeded because in each of
them the 'res' in the later proceeding had already been
adjudged in the earlier and the issue in either was eadem
questio. .... what mattered was the decision and not the
reasoning of the Court on the former occasion. .... The
principle enunciated by Bankes L. J. as set out above, and
affirmed or recognised in the other cases cited, as shown in
the preceding paragraph, was accepted by the Full Bench
of this Court in -- 'Santosh Kumar v. Nripendra Kumar',
AIR 1949 Cal 430 (FB) (F) and also by our earlier Full
Bench in the well-known and oft-quoted case of - 'Tarini
Charan v. Kedar Nath AIR 1928 Cal 777 (FB) (G) where
Rankin, C. J. observed at pages 782 of the Report that
      "what is conclusive between the parties is the
      decision of the Court and that reasoning of the Court
      is not necessarily the same thing as its decision. The
      object of the doctrine of res judicata is not to fasten
      upon parties special principles of law as applicable
      to them inter se, but to ascertain their rights and the
                                                                          2855

              facts   upon    which        those    rights    directly   and
              substantially     depend,       and     to      prevent    this
              ascertainment         from     becoming        nugatory     by
              precluding      the     parties      from      reopening    or
              recontesting that which has been finally decided.
        The first part of this observation clearly restates the above
        principle and in the lines that follow, read in the light of
        the later Full Bench case, above cited, there appears to be
        nothing which detracts from the correctness or efficacy of
        the said principle or whittles down its scope. That this is so
        becomes abundantly clear when we turn to the submission
        which was accepted by the Full Bench in this latter case of
        AIR 1949 Cal 430 (FB) (F)'. That submission appears at
        page 431 of the Report and is in these terms:
              "What is res judicata is the point directly decided or
              the order passed & not the reason thereof."
              The language shows a full and complete acceptance
        of the principle, quoted above, from (1919) 1 KB 328 (A)
        and the Full Bench must be taken to have put upon it the
        seal of its own authority. .... The position is thus well
        established that I what is res judicata is the decision and
        not the reason thereof."
3032.         This decision very succinctly elaborate as to when
the principle of res judicata would be attracted and, in our view,
apply with full force in this case.
3033.         Now coming to the judgment dated 30.3.1946, we
propose to consider it in a bit detail though we are satisfied that
even this judgment cannot be relied for the purpose for which
defendant-Muslim parties have referred the same. It has been
relied on by the defendants-Muslim parties to show that the
                                                             2856

building in dispute has already been held to be a Sunni mosque
and that judgment of the Civil Judge, Faizabad has attained
finality. Our attention was drawn to the following finding of the
Civil Judge, namely, "My conclusion therefore is that the
mosque in suit was founded by Babar Shah and not by Abdul
Baqi. I answer the issue accordingly." Having gone through the
above judgment, firstly we find that it was an inter se dispute
between Shia Central Board of Waqf and Sunni Central Board
of Waqf. In the present case the judgment is relevant only to
show that such a suit was filed and decided by the concerned
Court as also its result. The findings are recorded on various
issues inter parties, i.e. those who were before the Civil Judge
Faizabad in the above case are binding but the learned counsel
for the defendants Muslim parties could not show as to how the
same would bind the plaintiffs Suit-1 or other Hindu parties in
rest of the suits since none was impleaded in the aforesaid suit.
Besides a careful reading of the said judgment shows the
following facts:
      1.    It was an admitted case by both the parties that the
      mosque in dispute known as Babri mosque was
      constructed during the reign of Babar four centuries ago.
      2.    The said mosque was included in the list of Sunni
      Waqfs prepared by Chief Commissioner of Waqfs under
      section of U.P. Act 13 of 1936 i.e. U.P. Muslim Waqf Act
      and notified on 26th February 1944. The claim of Shia
      Waqf Board was that the said mosque is a Shia Waqf
      together with Idgah attached to it at Jalpa Nala, Ajodhia
      and village Bahranpur Pargana Haveli and 20 Bighas
      additional land known as Sholapur grove in Mohal
      Bahoranpur Tahsil and District Faizabad.
                                                         2857

3.   Five issues were framed therein and for our
purposes issues no. 1, 2 and 3 are relevant which are
reproduced as under:
     "1(a) Was the mosque in suit built by Abdul Baqi as
     alleged by the plff ? If so, was he a Shia as alleged ?
                                 or
     (b) Whether the mosque was constructed by Babar
     Shah as alleged by deft ?
     2. Is the suit within time ?
     3. Has the mosque in suit being used by the
     members of the Sunni sect as alleged by the deft for
     over 12 years ? If so, its effect ?"
4.   In respect of issue no. 1 the Court has taken note of
pedigree of Abdul Baqi which was pleaded by the
defendant Sunni Waqf Board and says as under:
                S.A. Baqi
                    /
              S. Hizabi Ali
                    /
               Hussain Ali
                    /
         Sukoowat Bibi=Rajab Ali
        ___________ /___________
          /           /            /
     Ali Naqi    M. Afzal       M. Asghar
                                     /
                                T.M. Razi
                           ______/_________
                          /               /
                     Kalab Husain    M. Zaki

     5.    In March 1945 when the suit was filed Kalab
     Husain came to be represent Mutwalli and a year
     ago, M. Zaki was Mutwalli.
     6.    Referring to Babur Digest part II, page 1 (2nd
     Edition), the Civil Judge has quoted an Arabian
                                                  2858

adage that "All people follow the religion of their
kings". He further noted:
      "It is said that the saying was exemplified to
      the fullest extent in Persia where whole of the
      people have become Shias since the occasion
      of the Safee (Safavi) dynasty in AD 1499. The
      process of assimilation was less rapid in India,
      where though several of Nawabs or local
      Governors were Shias (Shias.........). This was
      eminently the case in Oude (Oudh), the
      Nawabs of which were predictory Viziers
      (Wazirs) of the empire."
7.    The mosque in suit was admittedly built
during the time of Babar who ruled from 1526-1530
and it is clear from the passage quoted above that
the Persians have become Shias before that period.
8.    The Civil Judge besides oral evidence
considered    the   following    two    documentary
evidence:
      (i)    Documents pertaining to grant of cash
      Nankar; and
      (ii)   Documents relating to grant received
      from the Government.
9.    A gazetteer making reference of disputed
mosque at page 173 and 174 was considered by the
Civil Judge and in regard to the disputed mosque the
Civil Judge observed as under:
             "It shows that according to local
      affirmations Babar came to Ajodhia in 1528
      AD and halted there for a week during which
                                                        2859

            he destroyed the Janamasthan temple and on
            its site built a mosque using largely the
            materials of the old structure. The author then
            goes on to remark that no record of the visit is
            to be found in Musalman historians but it must
            have occurred about the time of Babar's
            expedition to Bihar. The first Settlement
            Report also gives the same history of this
            mosque and adds that according to Leyden's
            Memoirs of Babar, the Emperor encamped
            about 5 or 6 miles from Ajodhia and stayed
            for a week settling the surrounding country
            through it was remarkable that his doings at
            Ajodhia were wanting in his own memoirs
            (Baburnama)."
10.   Serious arguments advanced raised against the
authenticity and admissibility of the facts stated in the
gazetteer aforesaid in respect whereof the Civil Judge held
as under:
      "The history of the mosque in the Gazetteer & the
      Settlement Report was also sought to be impugned on
      the ground that Babar's visit to Ajodhia was not
      mentioned in any historical work & the Settlement
      Officer was not required to make any such
      investigation. I am unable to accept these contentions
      also as the works are works of reference and
      admissible u/s 57 of the Evidence Act. Moreover, in
      dealing with the matters like the present when no
      direct evidence is available, such works based on
      investigations on the spot and local tradition assume
                                                           2860

     great importance & unless disproved by superior
     evidence must be accepted as containing a correct
     history of the subjects mentioned therein."
11. The     Civil    Judge   thereafter   referred   to   two
inscriptions which were also referred in gazetteer and
discussed in the same as under:
     "Lastly, there are the two inscriptions in the mosque
     which have been reproduced in my inspection notes.
     These are also referred to in the Gazetteer &
     according to the date in the inscription on the
     pulpit it was built in 923 hijri while according to
     the other it was in 935 H. corresponding with 1528
     A.D. These inscriptions were the sheet-anchor of the
     plff's case but I am of the opinion that they are
     inconclusive.
           The first inscription contains three couplets in
     Persian & when translated runs as follows;
           "By the order (‫ )بفرمودہ‬of Shah Babar, whose
     justice went up to the skies (i.e. was well known)
     Amir (Noble) Mir Baqi of lofty grandson built this
     resting place for angels in 923 hijri".
           The second inscription is more elaborate and
     contains in the usual high-flown language an eulogy
     of Babar and describes Mir Baqi of Sophahian as his
     admirer & the builder of the mosque. This inscription
     no doubt supports the plffs' case, because it does not
     say that it was by the order of Babar Shah & it only
     refers to the reign of Babar but 1st couplet in the 1st
     inscription     near the pulpit clearly supports the
     theory that Babar had ordered the building of the
                                                              2861

            mosque as stated in the Gazetteer & the settlement
            report."
3034.       The above judgment shows that on the question that
the building in dispute was constructed in 1528 there was no
dispute between the parties since it was a lis inter se between
two Wakfs Board. The nature of building that it was a Mosque
was also not in dispute. The only question was whether it is a
Shia Wakf or a Sunni Wakf. The entire matter had proceeded in
this context. We have no hesitation to say that this judgment is
neither binding upon the plaintiffs before us nor can be relied on
to contend that a particular finding recorded therein is final and
that it should be treated to be a judgment in rem.
3035.       One more aspect. The judgment shows that in the
year 1928, Syed Abdul Baki, claimed to be the first Mutwalli
appointed by Babar itself, and in genealogy Mohammad Zaki
was seventh in generation. It is apparently unbelievable that
commencing from 1528 till 1945, i.e. more than 400 years, there
could be only seven generations in the entire genealogy. We
have no hesitation in not accepting the same.
3036.       Before us, the case set up and argued by the
defendants is that Babar never entered Ayodhya and, hence,
there did not arise any occasion for him either to get the alleged
temple demolished or direct for construction of a Mosque, but it
was Mir Baki who had been there and got it constructed. In the
judgment relied on by the defendants, an issue was raised,
whether Mosque was built by Abdul Baki or Babar. A finding
was recorded that it was constructed by Babar as pleaded by
Sunni Board. Evidently, the case set up before this Court is
wholly different and inconsistent to what was pleaded and
ultimately decided in the above judgment.
                                                              2862

3037.       Further, there is nothing on record to show that
name of the Mir Baki was Syed Abdul Baki or that Syed Abdul
Baki was the same person as Mir Baki. In "Babarnama" no
person is named as Mir Baki or Syed Abdul Baki. No document
showing that there existed person in the name of Mir Baki or
Abdul Baki in 1528 has been placed before us. When Babar
himself never entered Ayodhya, the question of appointment by
him of a Mutwalli would not have arisen. Even otherwise, on
the question as to who constructed the disputed structure and
when, we have already recorded a finding that the plaintiffs
(Suit-4) or the Muslim parties have failed to prove that the
disputed structure was constructed in 1528 either by Babar or
any of his agent on his command.
3038.       Moreover, a judgment by itself is not a piece of
evidence except to the extent it is provided under Section 41 to
43 of the Evidence Act.
3039.       In the context of Section 43 of Evidence Act, it is no
doubt true that a judgment is admissible provided it is a relevant
fact in issue as held in Seth Ramdayal Jat Vs. Laxmi Prasad
(Supra). In a civil case, the judgment of a Criminal Court may
be relevant where the fact in issue is about the existence of such
a judgment or not, but not more than that. The evidence
discussed in the judgment of a Criminal Court or the fact that a
person has confessed his guilt in his statement is not admissible
in evidence in a civil suit. This is what was held in Perumal Vs.
Devarajan & others AIR 1974 Mad. 14 and was quoted with
approval in Seth Ramdayal Jat (supra). The Apex Court also
approved a Patna High Court decision in Lalmani Devi &
others Vs. Jagdish Tiwary & others AIR 2005 Pat. 51. The
Court said that acquittal or conviction in a criminal case has no
                                                               2863

evidentiary value in a subsequent civil litigation except for the
limited purposes of showing that there was a trial resulting in
acquittal or conviction, as the case may be. The findings of the
Criminal Court are inadmissible. The Apex Court also followed
its earlier decision in Anil Behari Ghosh Vs. Smt. Latika Bala
Dassi & others AIR 1955 SC 566 taking the same view. There
appears to be a somewhat different authority in Shanti Kumar
panda (supra) where an observation was made that an order
passed by the Executive Magistrate in proceedings under
Section 145/146 Cr.P.C. is an order by a Criminal Court based
on a summary inquiry. The order is entitled to respect and
weight before the competent Court at the interlocutory stage. In
Ramdayal Jat (supra), the Apex Court observed that this
observation in Shanti Kumar Panda (supra) is per incurrium
being in conflict of a three-Judges decision in K.G.
Premshanker Vs. Inspector of Police & another JT 2002 (8)
SCC 87. The argument of possibility of conflict in decisions
was rejected in Seth Ramdayal Jat (supra) stating:
             "27. In regard to the possibility of conflict in
        decisions, it was held that the law envisages such an
        eventuality when it expressly refrains from making the
        decision of one Court binding on the other, or even
        relevant, except for certain limited purposes, such as
        sentence or damages. It was held that the only relevant
        consideration was the likelihood of embarrassment."
3040.        The Court further held that the Civil Court must
decide a suit on its own keeping in view the evidence which
have been brought on record before it and not in the light of the
evidence brought on record in the criminal proceedings. The
Court also observed that an earlier decision in M/s Karam
                                                              2864

Chand Ganga Prasad & another Vs. Union of India & others
1970 (3) SCC 694 holding that the decision of the Civil Court
will be binding on the Criminal Courts but the converse is not
true was overruled in K.G. Premshanker (supra) and this fact
has been noticed also in Syed Askari Hadi Ali Augustine
Imam & another Vs. State (Delhi Administration) & another
JT 2009 (4) SC 522.
3041.       Then it considered the question of admissibility of
an admission made by a party in a previous civil proceeding. It
was held that admission in the civil suit is admissible. With
respect to an admission made in a pleading, the Court relied on
Gautam Sarup Vs. Leela Jetly (supra) where it was held that
an admission made in a pleading is not to be treated in the same
manner as an admission in a document. An admission made by a
party to the lis is admissible against him proprio vigore. The
same thing was reiterated in Ranganayakamma & another Vs.
K.S. Prakash JT 2008 (8) SC 510.
3042.       Here the admission in Suit 29/1945 was that of
Sunni Board that the disputed structure was constructed by
Babar and therefore this admission may operate against it but
the findings of civil court shall not bind the plaintiffs.
3043.       Yet another angle, the plaintiffs set up the case of
being owner of the property in dispute, i.e., the land and
building both having constructed the building also. However, no
evidence whatsoever has been put forth to support the
ownership or title over the property in dispute. In the entire
plaint there is no averment as to how the plaintiff claim to own
the property in dispute. In para 2 they have asserted that
Janamsthan, i.e., Janambhumi is the birthplace of Lord Rama
situate in Ayodhya and always belong to the plaintiff no.1. How
                                                              2865

and in what manner it belong to plaintiff no. 1 is not stated.
Then in para 3 of the plaint it is said that a temple building of
Janambhumi existed on the disputed land and the said temple
ever since is in possession of the plaintiff no. 1 (para 4). But
here also it is not said as to how and when they came into
possession of the property in dispute. In the statement under
Order X Rule 2 CPC the plaintiffs have said that the temple was
made by the plaintiff and the land which is the birthplace of
Lord Rama is owned by the plaintiff. But in support of the
above two statements no evidence has been placed at all. Sri
Verma sought to rely on a registered deed of the bye-laws of
Nirmohi Akhara wherein Janamsthan is also mentioned amongst
the properties of Nirmohi Akhara and submits that this
document clearly shows that the place in dispute is owned by
the plaintiffs (Suit-1). We fail to understand as to how a
document sought to be prepared by plaintiff himself can create a
right or title on a property and in any case can be used as an
evidence against a third party. Merely because they got it
registered and have placed on record a certified copy thereof,
that does not mean that the contents thereof and their truth stand
proved. The only effect of filing a certified copy of a document
after obtaining from the authority in whose possession legally it
ought to be is that a formal proof stands dispensed with but that
does not mean that the correctness of the contents thereof also
will stand proved unless it is proved by producing cogent
evidence. When a certified copy is filed or when an old
document of thirty years is produced from proper custody, what
shall be deemed to stand proved has been considered time and
again.
3044.       In V. Seethaya & Ors. Vs. P. Subramanya
                                                                 2866

Somayajulu & Anr. A.I.R. 1929 Privy Council 115, it was
held:
        "Their Lordships agree with the learned Chief Justice and
        his coleagues in the High Court that the document was
        admissible as evidence of the terms of the lost original. The
        document is over 30 years old and is produced from
        proper custody. By S. 90, Evidence Act of 1872, the Court
        may therefore presume the signatures authenticating the
        copy to be genuine."
3045.         In the context of Sections 65 and 90 of the Evidence
Act, a Single Judge of Calcutta High Court in Khetter Chunder
Mookerjee Vs. Khetter Paul Sreeterutno 1880 ILR 5
(Calcutta) 886 observed that Section 90 provides where any
document, purporting or proved to be thirty years old is
produced from any custody which the Court in the particular
case considers proper, the Court may presume that the signature
and every other part of such document, which purports to be in
the handwriting of any particular person, is in that person's
handwriting; and, in the case of a document executed or
attested, that it was duly executed and attested by the persons by
whom it purports to be executed and attested. The Court said
that the execution of a document produced from proper custody,
and more than thirty years old, need not be proved, if the
document is produced.
3046.         In Land Acquisition Officer and Mandal Revenue
Officer Vs. V. Narasaiah (2001) 3 SCC 530 it was held that the
certified copy of a registered sale deed would be admissible in
evidence. The above decision was approved by the Constitution
Bench of the Apex Court in Cement Corpn. Of India Ltd. Vs.
Purya (2004) 8 SCC 270.
                                                                 2867

3047.         In Sarabjit Rick Singh Vs. Union of India (2008) 2
SCC 417 the Court in para 39 said :
        "It may be true that a document does not prove itself. Its
        contents, unless admitted, should be proved in terms of the
        provisions of the Evidence Act, unless the contents of the
        documents are said to be admissible by reason of a
        provision of a statute, as for example, Section 90 of the
        Evidence Act. But what misses the aforementioned
        submission/contention is that whereas the contents of the
        document is to be proved for the purpose of trial but not for
        the purpose of arriving at an opinion in regard to existence
        of a prima facie case in an enquiry."
3048.         Sri Verma, relying on the work of Sri A. Ghosh in
the "Law of Endowment (Hindu & Mahomedan)" by A.
Ghosh, Second Edn. published by Eastern Law House, Calcutta
(page 148-149) submitted that even hearse statements are
admissible in suit for recovery of possession filed by Shebait
who is wrongly ousted and reads as under:
        "In a suit to recover property claimed by the plaintiffs as
        shebaits lately in possession and wrongfully ousted
        therefrom, it was held that the statements made by the
        ancestors of plaintiffs and defendants were receivable as
        evidence. It is enough to say that possibly, possession and
        user in the apparent capacity of shebaits might, if
        unrebutted by any other evidence at all, be sufficient as
        evidence of title (so far as it goes) to make out a prima
        facie case in favour of the plaintiffs. In Srish Chandra v.
        Rakhalananda 41 C.W.N. 1103 Guha and Mitter, JJ.
discussing the question whether hearsay statements in regard to instalation and sheba of a deity are admissible or not, held that "the evidence given on the side of the plaintiffs, so far as it consisted of the statements by the plaintiffs in their evidence given in Court in support of the position that the deities Radha Gobinda and Lakshmi Narain Jiu were worshipped by them and maintained by the Kashimbazar Estate from generation to generation, that the plaintiffs' family had been doing the worship at the cost of the said Estate; that one of the plaintiffs, 65 years of age, heard about the origin of vritti from his father and the tradition descended from father to son, and the worship of the deities continued on the expenses paid, Rs. 4000 as vritti or annual grant, by the Kashimbazar Estate: that the vritti was received from the last five generations and the history of its origin came down as tradition in the family from father to son, as deposed by another plaintiff aged 63 years, was subjected to the comment that it was altogether inadmissible inasmuch as it was hearsay evidence. It was also contended on the 'authority' of the decisions in Lekraj Kuer v. Baboo Mahpal Singh 7 I.A. 63 : 5 C. 744 that regard being had to the provisions of Sec. 2 of the Indian Evidence Act, which has repealed all rules of evidence, not contained in any of the statutes or regulations, it was for the plaintiffs to make out that the evidence given by them was admissible under some provisions of the Indian Evidence Act. It is to be noticed in this connection that Sec. 2 (1) of the Indian Evidence Act repeals the whole of the English Common Law on Evidence so far as it was in force in British India before the passing of the Indian Evidence Act, and that provisions of the law, in effect, prohibits the employment of any kind of evidence not specifically authorised by the Act itself. It must be recognised, however, that the principle of exclusion adopted by the Indian Evidence Act, should not be applied so as to exclude matters which may be essential for the ascertainment of truth. Applying this principle to the case before us, the evidence of tradition in the family of the plaintiffs, can not be characterised and placed in the category of mere hearsay evidence inadmissible under the law .... The evidence coming from the plaintiffs' side, consisted of a tradition handed from time immemorial; and the evidence given by some of the plaintiffs was admissible as statement of opinion as to a family tradition, which was founded upon information derived from deceased persons. The relaxation of the rule as to reception of hearsay evidence must be held to be permissible where such a course tends to the due investigation of truth, and the attainment of justice." 3049. In a title suit, complete evidence showing ownership has to be placed on record. In Karnataka Board of Wakf Vs. Government of India & others (2004) 10 SCC 779, the Apex Court said that in a title suit, concrete evidence showing ownership must be placed on record. In para 8, the Court said:

"The contention of appellants that one Arabian saint Mahabari Khandayat came to India and built the Mosque and his lineal descendents possessed the property, cannot be accepted if it is not substantiated by evidence and records. As far as a title suit of civil nature is concerned, there is no room for historical facts and claims. Reliance on borderline historical facts will lead to erroneous conclusions. The question for resolution herein is the factum of ownership, possession and title over the suit property. Only admissible evidence and records could be of assistance to prove this."
3050. Further, with respect to Section 4 of Wakf Act, 1954, it observed that the Wakf Board could exercise its rights only over existing wakf properties since the suit property itself is not an existing wakf property. The appellant cannot exercise any right over the same. It further observed in para 12 that a plaintiff filing a title suit should be very clear about the origin of title over the property. He must specifically plead it. 3051. The defendants muslim parties have set up a claim that the building in dispute got constructed by Babar through his Commander Mir Baqi in 1528 AD and was given as public waqf to muslims resulting in a right vested in muslims in general. It is also said that the muslims have continued to keep possession in the shape of waqf over the Babari mosque from 1528 AD up to the present. It is further said that in case it is found that any temple existing on the site of the disputed structure in that case also the possession of the defendant muslim parties over the property in dispute for the last 400 years which is in the knowledge of the plaintiff to the suit or other Hindus and, therefore, they have lost any right over the property in dispute. It is not the case of the defendants that the Hindus in general or the plaintiffs are the owner of the property in question. 3052. In order to decide issue 8 (Suit-3), whether the rights of plaintiff have extinguished for want of possession over 12 years prior to the suit it has to be seen as to in which capacity the plaintiffs are claiming possession, what they have proved and only then the question of extinction will arise. A right extinguished, if somebody is deprived of possession of a property for more than 12 years under Section 28 of the LA 1963 and Section 27 of LA 1908 which are pari materia. The question of extinction of right would arise if somebody has right over the property and that too in the capacity as owner. If one is not owner of the property in question the occasion of loss of right or extinction of such right does not arise. In the case in hand since the plaintiffs have completely failed to show that they have right as owner over the property in dispute, or a title vested in the plaintiffs regarding the property in question, the occasion of loss of such right or extinction of such right does not arise at all. It is also not the case where the defendants have admitted title or ownership of the plaintiffs and hence they have no occasion to lead any evidence to prove such title. Had it been so, something could have been said and there could have been an occasion for this Court to consider whether the plaintiffs had the possession in the property in dispute for preceding 12 years prior to the date of filing of the suit or not. 3053. In Mohammad Shah Vs. Fasihuddin Ansari & others AIR 1956 SC 713 is the case where the plaintiffs admit that the defendant is in possession of certain property but they (plaintiffs) assert that the possession of the defendant is on behalf of Sunni Mohammad community. For this reason, the plaintiffs say that a declaratory suit will lie and no need to sue for possession. It is also contented that no question of limitation or adverse possession can arise because firstly the possession is and always has been that of the community through the defendant and secondly because the defendant is a trustee under a trust for a specific purpose and so cannot set up a title hostile to the trust. In that case neither of the side possessed any document of title. It was held that the burden lies upon the plaintiffs. Defendant is admittedly in possession and except for the fact that he (defendant) is in possession on their (plaintiffs') behalf (a fact which the defendant denies), the plaintiffs are out of possession. Hence, the plaintiffs must prove that the defendant is in possession on their behalf. It also held that a stranger to the trust could have encroached on the trust estate and would in course of time have acquired a title by adverse possession. But a Mutwalli cannot take up such a position. 3054. Sri Verma, however, submitted that before the Magistrate, in the proceedings under Section 145 Cr.P.C., a number of evidences were filed by the Muslim parties admitting that the possession of the property in dispute is with the Hindus. Muslims have never visited since 1934 the said building and the same may be handed over to Hindus. It is contended that the said documents are admissible in evidence having been filed in statutory proceedings and that would show that the defendants' claim for adverse possession has no basis at all. 3055. We may clarify at this stage since we are referring and mentioning at many places the register number and page number in respect to the documentary evidence filed by the parties that the documents (exhibits) are running in a few thousand pages. Condition of most of the documents is also precarious being quite old. Many were already in torn conditions and it was difficult to preserve so as to be used by the Court during arguments. In the circumstances, various documents filed by the parties in these cases marked 'exhibits', for the convenience of the parties, were directed to be scanned and bound in the form of registers, which have been prepared and are 42 in numbers. We, therefore, while discussing the exhibits and other documents filed by the parties, for convenience, refer the register number and page number thereof for tracing it out smoothly.

3056. Register Nos.1 and 2 contain documents and papers relating to the proceedings conducted under Section 145 Cr.P.C. and have in all, 322 pages (Register 1 page 1-132 and Register 2 pages 133-322).

3057. Our attention is drawn to written statement dated 17th January, 1950 (Page 69-75 Register 1) of one Srivastava Narayan Prasad Sinha raising the question of ownership/ proprietorship of the disputed premises stating that he is representative of Raja Ram Narain, who enter into a treaty on 22nd August, 1757 and 23rd February, 1758 claiming possession including Faizabad Nazul area. He submitted that under the orders of Emperor Babur, a temple of Lord Ram Chandra Ji and Vishnu, situated at the place, was dismantled and using the material including pillars affixed there, the disputed building was constructed. He also refers to the existence of two places of worship within the enclosure of the disputed premises and continued worship by Hindus in the said two places. He gave some other facts showing how Raja Ram Narain came into picture, who own and possess the disputed premises Sri Sinha, however, neither has come up in the Civil Court to raise such a claim nor is represented before us. The version contained in his written statement filed before the Magistrate in the proceedings under Section 145 Cr.P.C. remain his ex parte version having not been proved as per the prescribed procedure in law. Therefore, we find it difficult to look into those aspects, as said by him in the aforesaid written statement. 3058. Our attention was also drawn to the affidavit filed by Sri Anisur Rahman, S/o Maulvi Vaziruddin along with his criminal transfer application No.208 of 1950 (Page 87-94 Register 1) wherein para 2 he said "...the courtyard of the mosque is separated by a wall from a small temple which is situated to its East." It also says "Hindus and muslims of Ajodhya have been peacefully and calmly carrying on their worship in the temple and prayers in the mosque respectively from times immemorial."

3059. Sri P.N. Mishra, and Sri Verma, learned counsels drew our attention to paragraphs 4 and 5 of the affidavit which reads as under:

"4. That on the 9th of November, 1949 it was found that two tombs and about 25 graves which lay outside the compound of the Babari mosque had been levelled down and the mosque in the cemetery known as the "Qanati"
mosque had been dug up and a new platform adjacent to the aforesaid mosque was constructed and an idol placed on that platform."

"5. That from 22.11.1949 the Hindus of the place started their 'Jap' (worship) on that place in which a large number of Hindus were collected and for that reason the police advised the muslims not to say their prayers in the surviving Babari mosque all the 5 times while the 'Jap' continued but confine it to Fridays only. In order to avoid a communal clash the muslims acted on the advice and continued to say their prayer every Friday upto December 16, 1949. Except for the Friday prayers the mosque used to be kept locked and guarded by the Police."
3060. It is contended that though the above affidavit is a part of the transfer application filed before this Court, which has already been rejected vide judgment dated 30th May, 1950 by Hon'ble B. Bhargava as His Lordship then was, but the facts asserted therein amounts to admission on the part of the Muslims and therefore, facts contrary to what have been pleaded by them subsequently can validly be ignored. They are estopped from changing their statement. It is said that it is an admission and therefore, is binding on the Muslim parties. They cannot take a stand which has been taken by them through their representative Anisur Rahman in the above matter. 3061. Then also drew our attention to certain affidavits filed by Sri Hasnu, S/o Aladin and Wali Mohammad S/o Hasnu dated 8th February, 1950 (Register 1, Page 95) stating that the disputed building was constructed by demolition of Janam Bhumi temple. Hindu and Muslim both were offering worship. After 1857, Muslims were offering Namaz on Friday inside the mosque. In the outer enclosure, Hindus were worshipping Lord Ram Chandra Ji and except of Friday they were also worshiping inside the mosque. There has been consistent agitation between Hindu and Muslim. In 1934 some part of the mosque was damaged but all Hindus were acquitted. Thereafter Muslims stopped offering Namaz and Hindus are continuously worshipping since then and till date. The deponents have no objection if the said mosque is handed over to Hindus. Copies of affidavits filed by Sri Peeru S/o Varati dated 11.02.1950 (Page 101 Register 1); Mohd. Umar S/o Wazir dated 11.02.1950 (Page 105 Register 1); Azimullah S/o Razab dated 13.02.1950 (Page 109 Register 1); Latif S/o Abdul Aziz dated 13.02.1950 (Page 113 Register 1); Mohd. Hussain S/o Wasau dated 14th February, 1950 (Page 119 Register 1); and Abdul Jalil S/o Abdul Wahid dated 14th February, 1950 (Page 121 Register 1) were also placed before us. Besides the affidavits, the aforesaid persons also filed their separate written statements before the concerned Magistrate in the proceeding initiated under Section 145 Cr.P.C., which are also part of the record i.e. Register 1. All these affidavits have similar contents. 3062. Register 2 also contain copies of affidavits worded in the similar languages, as noticed above, which have been filed by the following:

1. Jaan Mohammad S/o Husaini dated 14.02.1950 (Page 137)
2. Abdul Sattar S/o Shamsher Khan dated 16.02.1950 (Page 141)
3. Abdul Ganni S/o Allah Bux dated 16.02.1950 (Page
143)
4. Rozeed S/o Tunnu Dated 16.02.1950 (Page 147)
5. Hosaldar S/o Ghirau dated 16.02.1950 (Page 151)
6. Ramzan S/o Jumman dated 16.02.1950 (Page 153)
7. Gulley Khan S/o Nawab Ali dated 16.02.1950 (Page
157)
8. Mohd. Ismail dated 16.02.1950 (Page 161)
9. Abdul Shakur S/o Eedan dated 16.02.1950 (Page
165)
10. Abdul Razzak S/o Wazir dated 16.02.1950 (Page
171)
11. Naseebdar S/o Jahan dated 24.02.1950 (Page 177) 3063. The above affidavits in Register 2 are also accompanied with the written statement of the said persons. It is mentioned on the back of the written statement that the same were received by the Magistrate, verified by the persons claims to have filed the same and thereafter were taken on record.
3064. The admissibility of the aforesaid affidavits and the contents thereof was disputed by Sri Jilani, and other counsels who have adopted his arguments, stating that said documents were filed before the Magistrate but the averments therein, at the best, are ex parte version and those deponents have neither been examined as witnesses nor the Muslim parties had any occasion to cross examine them. Therefore, the aforesaid documents are inadmissible.

3065. On the contrary, Sri P.N.Mishra and Sri R.L.Verma, learned counsels submitted that the documents filed in statutory proceedings are admissible in evidence to the extent that the facts stated therein amounts to an admission and the same can be relied on by the other party in subsequent judicial proceedings. No authority in support of the above submission covering the issue directly cited by the learned counsels. We are, however, of the view that in the absence of the authors being available for cross-examination by the other side their ex parte version, if any, contained in the documents filed even before a statutory authority, cannot be relied on and cannot partake the nature of an admission binding on a party in the subsequent judicial proceedings.

3066. We may notice at this stage the reply dated 05.04.1950 (Page 195 Register 2) submitted by the then City Magistrate, Faizabad i.e. Sri Markandeya Singh before this Court in the criminal transfer application filed by Sri Annisur Rahman wherein para 3 he said :

"Regarding allegations contained in para 8, I beg to say that on being satisfied from credible sources that a dispute likely to lead to a breach of the peace between Hindus & Muslims in Ayodhya over the question of rights of proprietorship & worship in the buildings claimed variously as Babri Masjid & Janam Bhumi Mandir, I passed an order u/s 145 Cr.P.C. and attached the said building. The parties were called upon to put in written statement of their respective claims with regard to the fact of actual possession of the subject of the dispute. As a matter of fact the order u/s 145 Cr.P.C. was meant to check an imminent breach of the peace."
3067. So far as the District Magistrate is concerned, on page 199 Register Vol.2 is a letter dated 6th April, 1950 by Sri J.N.Ugra, while forwarding explanation of Sri Markandeya Singh, City Magistrate, Faizabad wherein he has said that he himself (Sri Ugra) has taken charge as District Magistrate, Faizabad on the afternoon of 14th March, 1950 and had nothing to do with the case at any stage. At the cost of repetition we may place on record hereat these two documents which were taken into consideration by this Court and thereafter the transfer application was rejected. There are two written statements filed by Sri Baba Abhayram Das dated 29th December 1950 (Page 203 Register 2) and Baba Baldev Das dated 27.09.1950/29.12.1950 (page 207 Register 2) wherein it has been said that the property in dispute for the last more than 12 years is in possession of Nirmohi Akhara and also owned by it. From 1935, no Muslim person has ever enter the disputed premises and has also not offered any prayer (Namaz) therein. 3068. On Page 211 Register 2 is a statement of Sri Sattar Mohammed S/o Barsani dated 21.04 (year is illegible) stating that the building in dispute was constructed by Babur in 1528 A.D. and was made a public wakf for the benefit of Muslims in general and since then for several hundreds years uninterruptedly Muslims are offering Namaz therein till December, 1949.

3069. Sri Anisur Rahman also filed his separate written statement dated 08.07.1950/29.12.1950 (Page 215-219 Register

2) and with respect to the nature of the disputed property, period of construction/possession and worship etc. from para 1 to 9 it says as under:

^^nQk 1- ;g fd bekjr eqrukft;k okds eksgYyk jkedksV 'kgj v;ks/;k 'kgu'kkg fgUn ckcj 'kkg dh rkehj djnk efLtn ekSlwe cckcjh efLtn gS- ftl dks 'kgu'kkg etdwj us ckn Qrsg;kch fgUnksLrku nkSjku D;ke v;ks/;k lu 1528 bZ0 esa rkehj djk;k- vkSj reehj djds reke eqlyekuku ds fy, oDQ vke dj fn;k- ftl esa vke eqlyekuku dk gd bcknr gS-
nQk 2- ;g fd ckn rkehj efLtn etdwj 'kgu'kkg ckcj us efLtn etdwj dh f[krkcr o nhxj v[kjktkr ds fy, ,d jde vfr;k lkykuk vius [ktkuk 'kkgh ls eksdjZj fd;k- tks nkSjku lyrur eqx+fy;k etdwj dks cjkcj feyrk jgk- vkSj ckn toky lyrur eqxfy;k uokchu vo/k us bl vfr;k dks dk;e jD[kk- vkSj uokc vklQqn~nkSyk cgknqj us vius tekuk gqdwer esa jde vfr;k etdwj dks btkQk djds eqcfyx 302 :0 3 vkuk 6 ikbZ lkykuk vrk djuk eatwj fd;k- tks jde ckn bUrtk lyrur vo/k fczfV'k xouZesUV us Hkh tkjh jD[kk- vkSj tekuk cUnkscLr vOoy esa xouZesUV cjrkfu; us eqRrofYy;ku dks ctk; uDn vfr;k et+dwj ds eokft;kr 'kksykiqjh o cgksjuiqj eqRrfly v;ks/;k crkSj ekQh fcukcj elkfjQ efLtn ckcjh vrk fd;k-
nQk 3- ;g fd vke eqlyekuku vkSj Qjhd nks;e dk dCtk crkSj oDQ vke bekjr eqrukft;k ;kuh efLtn ckcjh ij 1528 bZ0 ls vkt rd eqlyly pyk vkrk gS-
nQk 4- ;g fd Qjhd nks;e o vke eqlyekuku tk;n vt 400 lky cbYe o vkxkgh Qjhd vOoy o vke vgsys fguwn bekjr eqrukft;k esa crkSj efLtn oDQ vke fcyk fdlh jksd Vksd ds viuh bcknr djrs vkSj uekt i<+rs pys vk, gS-
nQk 5- ;g fd Qjhd vOoy ;k vke vgsys fguwn dk dksbZ gd bekjr eqrukft;k ;kuh efLtn ckcjh esa u Fkk vkSj u gS- vkSj u mudk dCtk dHkh bl ij jgk gS vkSj u gS-
nQk 6- ;g fd bekjr eqrukft;k ;kuh efLtn ckcjh u dHkh efUnj tUe Hkwfe Fkh vkSj u gS- vkSj u dHkh Jh jkepUnz th dk efUnj jgk- nQk 7- ;g fd Qjhd nks;e o nhxj eqlyekuku us bekjr etdwj ;kuh efLtn ckcjh esa 16 fnlEcj lu~ 49 bZ0 rd uekt tqek ctekr vnk dh-
nQk 8- ;g fd dqN 'kksfj'k ilUn vgsys fguwn us ftl esa dqN eqdkeh Qjhd vOoy Hkh 'kkfey Fkh- 12 uoEcj lu~ 1949 bZ0 dks bekjr eqrukft;k ;kuh efLtn ckcjh ds djhc exj - - - - efLtn ls ckgj esa tki 'kq: fd;k- ftl esa ,d vEcksg dlhj vgsys fguwn dk tek gqvk ftl us fd dqN dOjs vkSj dukrh efLtn dh csgqjerh dh- tc Qjhd nks;e us bl dh [kcj gqDdke ftyk dks nh rks mUgksaus ,d iqyhl xkMZ bl eqdke ij rSukr dj fn;k fd vkbUnk bl fdLe dh gjdr ljt+n u gks-
nQk 9- ;g fd 22 uoEcj lu~ 49 bZ 0 dk s tc ;g e'kg wj gq v k fd bekjr eq r ukft;k ckcjh efLtn in dq N 'kk sf j'k ilUn eq Q fln geyk djuk pkgrs gS - rk s mldh bRryk gq D dke ftyk dk s nh xbZ - rk s mUgk sau s iq y hl xkMZ es a btkQk dj fn;k vkS j gj uekt ds ckn efLtn etdwj esa rkyk yxk;k tkus yxk-^^ "Section 1. That the controversial building situated in Mohalla Ram Kot Ayodhya city was built by the king of Hind Shah Babar and is a Masjid known as Babri Masjid. This Masjid was built by the said king Babar after he won Hindustan in 1528 A.D. in Ayodhya and made it a general Waqf for all the Muslims who have a right to offer prayers there.
Section 2. That after getting the Masjid constructed Shahanshah Babar, for khitabat and other expenses in respect of the Masjid sanctioned an amount as a recurring gift fund from the Royal Treasury which continued to be given during the royal regime of Moghuls. After the down fall of this royal kingdom, Nawabeen of Oudh continued the tradition and the recurring grant for the Masjid was regularly paid. Not only this Nawab Asifuddaula of Oudh, increased this amount of grant for the Masjid to Rs. 302- 3annas and 6pies. This amount of recurring gift later continued in the British regime after the down fall of Oudh. During Bandobast first the British Govt. did not paid cash to the Mutawallis, instead they allotted two Mawaziat of Sholapuri and Bahoranpur adjacent to Ayodhya as moafi for the expenditure of Babari Masjid.
Section 3. That the possession of the general Muslim as well as the party number2 as Waqf Aam over the controversial building that is Babri since 1528 continues till date.
Section 4. That the party number2 and general Muslim possess the controversial premises as Masjid offer prayers and recite Namaz in it for more than 400 years, without any hindrance what soever and this fact is well in the knowledge of party number 1 and the Hindus. Section 5. That neither the party number 1 nor the Hindus had any right over the controversial building that is Babri Masjid. They never had nor have any possession over it. Section 6. That the controversial building that is Babri Masjid was never or is Mandir Janam Bhoomi. It has never been a Mandir of Ram Chandraji :
Section 7. That party number 2 and general Muslims offered Namaz Juma till December 16, 1949. Section 8. That some mischievous Hindus including the party number1, On November 12, 1949 began Jaap near the controversial building that is Babri Masjid in which large number of Hindus gathered and they damaged some of the graves and outer wall of the Masjid. That the party number 2 informed the district officers and they simply posted a guard there so that this act might not be repeated again.
Section 9. That on November 22,1949 when a word was around that some unlawful elements would attack the controversial building that is Babri Masjid, the district officers were informed who increased the number of guards on the spot who began locking the Masjid after every namaz."(E.T.C.) 3070. In para 13 thereof Sri Anisur Rahman also said that Sunni Central Board of Wakf U.P. is a necessary party and that he has right to offer worship in the said building hence the idols placed therein be immediately removed and his right of worship be restored.
3071. Since all these persons have neither been examined nor cross examined before this Court, therefore, these documents can not be read in evidence. Be that as it may, what we find is a piquant situation in this case. The plaintiffs have set up a case claiming ownership of the property in dispute but have failed to discharge their burden particularly when the defendants have not admitted their title. The defendants at the first stance have set up a case based on their title and possession but, thereafter, have pleaded that in any case their possession having continued for hundred years, the title, if any, of the plaintiff stands extinguished. The plea of extinction of title will depend on a proven fact that the other person has a title, only then the question of extinction will arise. If the title has not extinguished of that person, and no one else is pleaded by the defendant as owner against whom he claims to have matured a title by prescription, the defendants' plea of adverse possession would also fail. We have already referred to various authorities showing necessary ingredients of adverse possession, how and in what manner it has to be pleaded and proved. All these legal mandatory requirements are apparently missing not only in the pleading but parties have also failed to prove their case so far as the question of adverse possession is concerned. We have considered witnesses of Muslim parties i.e. PW 1 to 9 and few others. Many of them have categorically stated that in the entrance gate of dividing wall, no lock ever put till 22 nd December 1949. It is also not the case that there was some other arrangement made to check entry of the members of one community and it was confined to another community. It appears to us, that, no person was restricted from entering the premises in dispute (inner courtyard) and in fact there was no restriction at all whatsoever to any one's visit to the premises in dispute (inner courtyard) for the purpose of worship. The mere entry of Muslims in the premises in dispute in such manner, by no mean can be termed as 'possession' what to say of "exclusive possession" so as to meet the requirement of plea of adverse possession.
3072. The documents or orders under Section 145 Cr.P.C., since do not decide the matter of title, only to a limited extent can been seen. On a question as to who is entitled for possession, it was held in Dinomoni Chowdhrani Vs. Brojo Mohini Chowdharani (supra) that the Police orders referable to Criminal Procedure Act applicable in 1867 and 1876 for preventing breaches of peace are admissible in evidence on general principles as well as under Section 13 of the Evidence Act to show that such orders were made. They decide no question of title. Under Section 145 Cr.P.C., the Magistrate, if possible, is to decide which of the parties is in possession of the land in dispute and once he take such a decision, he would pass an order declaring such party entitled to retain possession until evicted in due course of law. The Judicial Committee held:
"This necessarily makes them evidence of the following facts, all of which appear from the orders themselves, namely, who the parties to the dispute were; what the land in dispute was; and who was declared entitled to retain possession. For this purpose, and to this extent, such orders are admissible in evidence for and against every one when the fact of possession at the date of the order has to be ascertained."
3073. Even otherwise it cannot be said that the plaintiffs had "possession" of the property in dispute i.e. inner courtyard. They never entered the premises exclusively, prior to 22.12.1949, for the purpose of managing, maintaining or worshipping in the capacity of priest, Pujari or Mahant and, therefore, the question of extinction of their right even otherwise does not arise. OPW 1 a witness produced on behalf of plaintiffs (Suit-5) has stated that in the night of 22 nd/23rd December, 1949 idols from Ram Chabutara in the outer courtyard were shifted to the building in the inner courtyard and placed under the central dome of three domed structure. He has also said that from 23rd December, 1949 and onwards Pooja etc. of the idols were observed by the Mahants and priests of Nirmohi Akhara till the property was attached under Section 145 Cr.P.C. vide order dated 29th December, 1949 of Magistrate. On this aspect neither any evidence contradicting the said statement has been placed by the defendants muslim parties nor OPW 1 has been cross-
examined on this aspect but this is not admitted by plaintiffs and hence cannot be read in their favour.

3074. However, as we have already said, the Hindus continue to visit inner courtyard for the purpose of worship. It may be said that the members or people of Nirmohi Akhara were not included in those persons, i.e., Hindus. The nature of worship has also been clarified by some of the witnesses that they used to worship the place which they believe as birthplace of Lord Rama in inner courtyard as also images of Gods and Goddesses carved on the black Kasauti stone pillars which were there in the disputed building in the inner courtyard. Therefore, entry of plaintiffs in the inner courtyard as a mere worshipper atleast till the date when the property was attached may not be doubted but the issue in question is about extinction of their rights which means the right in the capacity of the owner or title as contemplated under Section 27 of LA 1908. In this context we find that the plaintiffs have failed to prove any such right, and the question of extinction thereof does not arise. 3075. The suit having been filed in 1959. It cannot be said that in the preceding 12 years the plaintiffs never had possession over the property in dispute (inner courtyard). Neither the plaintiffs could discharge burden of proof that they own the property in dispute nor the defendants could prove by leading trustworthy evidence that the plaintiffs were the owner but remain dispossessed from the property in dispute for over 12 years and that prior or upto the date of the suit, defendants fulfilled all the requirement to clear the plea of adverse possession. Issue no. 8 (Suit-3) is decided accordingly in negative.

3076. Issue 2 (Suit-4) relates to the possession of the property in dispute of the plaintiffs upto 1949. The burden to prove this issue lie upon the plaintiffs. The concept of property in Suit is different then what it was in Suits-1 and 3. Suits-1 and 3 were confined to the premises covered by the inner courtyard of the disputed site. Suit-4, however, relates to the entire premises, i.e., inner and outer courtyard both excluding a small area in the southern side. The plaintiffs, therefore, have to prove first that they were in possession of the entire property, i.e., inner and outer courtyard both upto 1949 and only then the question of their dispossession from the same in 1949 would arise.

3077. Besides, we may also mention at this stage and shall discuss it later in detail that there is no factual averment in the plaint that the plaintiffs were dispossessed at any point of time in 1949. On the contrary their case is that in the night of 22nd/23rd December, 1949 idols were kept in the building in dispute, i.e., the premises marked as A B C D in the map appended to the plaint which means the inner and outer courtyard both. This placement of idols resulted in obstructing the right of worship of plaintiffs, as well as defiled and desecrated the mosque. These are three different things and their ingredients are also different. However, we shall discuss it in detail later on.

3078 At this stage, we are concentrating on the question whether the plaintiffs have discharged burden of proof about their possession of property in suit as a whole, i.e., inner and outer courtyard, up to 1949.

3079. In para 5 of the plaint (Suit-4) itself the plaintiffs have averred:

"5. That in the mosque, but outside the main building of the mosque, there was Chabutara 17' x 21' on which there was a small wooden structure in the form of a tent which is still there."
3080. Regarding this Chabutara they have read certain averments pertaining to an earlier litigation between Mahant Raghubar Das and the State in 1885 in which one Mohd. Asghar claiming himself Mutwalli of Babari Mosque also appeared as defendant no. 2. Paragraphs no. 6, 6A, 6B, 6C, 6D, 6E, 6F and 7 relate to the said litigation and various judgements passed therein. It read:

"6. That in 1885, one Mahant Raghubar Dass alleging himself to be the Mahant of Janam Asthan instituted a suit (Original Suit No. 61/280 of 1885) against the Secretary of State for India in Council and Mohd. Asghar, Mutawalli of the Babri mosque, for permission to build a temple on the Chabutra 17' x21' mentioned in para 5 above, in the court of the learned Civil Judge, Faizabad which was dismissed, and an appeal from the said decree was also dismissed.
By the learned District Judge, Faizabad (Civil Appeal No. 27 of 1885). In the sketch map filed alongwith the plaint in Suit No. 61/280 of 1885 the entire building, with the exception of the Chabutra 17' x 21' was admitted to be mosque and was shown as such. 6A. That the cause of action for the suit in Suit No. 61/280 of 1885 in the Court of the Civil Judge, Faizabad, arose on the refusal of the Dy. Commissioner of Faizabad on the representation of some Muslims to grant permission to Mahant Raghubar Dass, Mahant of Janam Asthan for the construction of a temple on the ground that a temple could not be permitted to be built on land adjoiing the mosque (meaning thereby the Babri Masjid). 6B. "In that suit Regular Suit No. 61/280 of 1885 of the Court of Civil Judge, Faizabad Mahant Raghubar Dass was suing on behalf of Himself, on behalf of Janam Asthan, and on behalf of the whole body of persons interested in Janam Asthan and Mohd. Asghar, Mutawalli of the Babir Masjid was made a defendant."
6C. Mohammad Asghar Defendant Mutawalli of Babir Masjid contested the suit inter-alia on the ground that the land on which the temple is sought to be built is not the property of the plaintiff or of the Asthan, that the said land lies within the Ahata of Babari Masjid and is the property of the Masjid.

6D. That in the suit mentioned above the matter directly and substantially in issue was:-

(i) the existence of the Babari Masjid.

(ii) the right of Hindus to construct a temple on land adjoining the Masjid.

The existence of the mosque was admitted by the plaintiff in that suit and the Suit of the plaintiff was dismissed on the further ground of public policy.

6E. If the building was not a masjid but a temple as alleged in the present suit the matter might and ought to have been pleaded by Mahant Raghubar Dass in the former suit (suit No. 61/280 of 1885 mentioned above) and shall be deemed to have been a matter directly and substantially in issue in that Suit and the plea that the building is not a Masjid but a temple cannot be raised in the present suit. For the reasons mentioned above the decision in the former suit operates as resjudicate in the present Suit.

6F. That on the admission contained in the plaint of Regular Suit No. 61/280 of 1885 mentioned in the preceding paragraphs it must be taken an established fact that the building now claimed by the Hindus as the temple of Janam Asthan was and is a mosque and not a temple.

7. That the suit mentioned above was a sensational case, in which the entire Hindu public and more specially all the Mahants of Ajodhiya and other respectable Hindus of Ajodhiya and Faizabad were deeply interested." 3081. The sketch map filed alongwith the plaint in Suit- 1885 has been relied upon by plaintiffs as is evident from para 6 of the plaint stating that the said Chabutara was shown therein in the mosque premises. In para 6 referring to the order of the Deputy Commissioner, the plaintiffs said, "a temple could not be permitted to be built on land adjoining the mosque (meaning thereby Babari masjid)." It shows that the plaintiffs also believed that the actual building structure only constitute mosque and rest of the area between the outer wall and the building was land adjoining the mosque and not the mosque itself or part of the mosque itself. The written statement filed by Mohd. Asghar in 1885 suit has been referred to in para 6(C) and copy thereof has also been placed on record as Exhibit A-23, Suit-1, Register 7, page 255, Admitting that the said Chabutara was constructed in 1857, he, however, submitted that the said action was unauthorised. In para 5 he admits that Sita Rasoi and a Kuti has also been constructed and despite of the orders having been issued the same are not removed.

3082. The map appended to the plaint in Suit-1885 is also on record as Exhibit A 22 (Suit-1), (Register 7 page 239) and it would be appropriate to reproduce the said map (only disputed site):

Note: The rectangular area covered by letters W B W1 W2 on the extreme southern side is not the part of property in dispute in Suit-4.
3083. There is an endorsement at the bottom of the said map as under:
"A B C D E is in the possession of the Hindus. W E F G H is in possession of Mohammedans."
3084. It also shows that the partition wall 'F G' has one entrance gate and on its northern side there was a barbed window. In the outer courtyard three structures are shown, i.e., Chabutara, Chappar and Sita Chulha. (also called Sita Rasoi and Chhatti Pujan Sthal) 3085. The correctness of the map was not disputed in 1885 Suit. The Court in 1885 appointed Gopal Sahai Amin's Commission to prepare the map by spot inspection and submit report. This map was submitted alongwith report dated 6th December 1885. The report is Exhibit A 24 (Suit-1) (Register 7, page 275) and the Gopal Sahai Amin Commissioner's map is Exhibit A 25, (Suit-1) (Register 7, page 277). There is nothing on record to show that this map was ever disputed by defendant no. 2, i.e., Mohd. Asghar in the said suit. Therefore, as long back in 1885 in the outer courtyard three non Islamic structures existed and the premises of the outer courtyard was claimed to be possessed by Hindus which by itself was not disputed. Only this much was contested that this possession is unauthorised. Issue no. 5 (Suit-1885) pertains to the correctness of the measurement of Chabutara and in the judgement dated 24.12.1885 of the trial court, i.e., Sri Hari Kishan, Sub-Judge Faizabad, he said:

^^fuLcr rudhg iUtqe ds ekSd+s ij iSekb'k dh vkSj iS e kb'k uD +' kk lgh gS tk s eq r kfcd+ eq U ntkZ nkok gS fd eq g Een vlx+j dk s Hkh ml rknkn eq U ntkZ vt+h Z nkok es a vc dq N mtz + u jgk cfYd og dqN rknkn dqN bUp esa de gS rknkn Q+hV lgh gSA** "Regarding Issue no. 5 I took the measurement on- the-spot and found the map to be correct which is in consonance with the plaint. Mohd. Asghar also does not have any objection whatsoever with regard to the figure mentioned in the plaint, rather the measurement is a few inches less but number of feet is correct." 3086. For Chabutara and other things, the finding recorded by trial court, not disputed in appeal, and also before us by the plaintiffs (Suit-4), who in fact, rely on the said judgement, are as follow:
^^fuLcr rud+hg 'k'kqe ceqykfgtk ekSd+k t+kfgj gS fd pju ;kuh iknq d k uD +' k gS fd ftldh ijlfr'k gk sr h gS flok; blds pcwrjs ls efUnj ckdS+; pcwrjs ij ,d ewjr Bkdqj th j[kh gqbZ gS ftldh ijfLr'k gksrh gSA pcwrjk ed+c+wtk eqn~nbZ gS fd tks dqN ml ij p<+kok p<+rk gS og eqn~nbZ ysrk gS fd bl ckr ;kuh p<+kok dks bl oD+r eqgEen vlx+j eqn~nkySg Hkh rlyhe djrs gSaA xokgku eqn~nbZ ls dCt+k eqn~nbZ dk c[kwch lkfcr gS fd bl otg ls nhokj dVgjsnkj gn fgUnw eqlyeku vygnk vlsZ ls d+k;e gqbZ gS ftldk ft+dz vkbUnk ekSd+s ij gksxkA xokgku eqn~nkySg d+Ct+k pcwrjk eqn~nbZ ls uokd+fQ+;r t+kfgj djrs gSaA njfe;ku efLtn o pcwrjs ds ,d iq[rk nhokj dVgjsnkj gS fd uD+'kk eqjfRrck vehu blykgs nkok ds eqykfgtk ls c[k+wch dSfQ;r ekSd+k equdf'kQ+ gks ldrh gS vkSj lkQ+ t+kfgj gS fd gqnwn njfe;ku efLtn o pcwrjs dh d+k;e dh xbZ gS vkSj bldh rkbZn ljdkjh x+t+sfV;j ls tks d+Cy eqrkuktk gky ds eqjfRrc gqvk c[kwch gkfly gS fd is'krj fgUnw o eqlyeku nksuksa bl eqd+ke ij ijfLr'k djrs Fks lu~ 1855 esa ckn yM+kbZ njfe;ku fgUnw o eqlyeku ,d nhokj dVgjs dh okLrs jQ+s fut+k ds cuk nh xbZ fd vUnj mlds eqlyeku o ckgj fgUnw yksx ijfLr'k djsaA** "Regarding Issue no. 6 it is clear from the spot inspection that 'Charanpaduka' is placed there which is being worshipped. Besides this Chabutra, an idol of Thakur Ji is also placed there which is also being worshipped. The Chabutra is occupied by the plaintiff and whatever offerings are offered are taken by the plaintiff. The respondent Mohd. Asghar also accepts this fact concerning offerings and its acceptance by the plaintiff. From the statements of the witnesses of the plaintiff his possession is well established and, therefore, barbed wire wall exists since long separating Hindus from Muslims which will be mentioned at the appropriate stage. The witnesses of the respondent express ignorance about the possession of the plaintiff over the Chabutra. There is a barbed wire wall between the Masjid and the Chabutra which may be evident from a perusal of the map prepared by Amin and the situation becomes clear from it that limit has been created between Masjid and the Chabutra which is verified by Government Gazetteer which was prepared prior to the dispute in question. Earlier, both Hindus and Muslims used to worship at this place. In 1855, after the riot between Hindus and Muslims, a barbed wire fencing was erected to avoid any clash between Hindus and Muslims so that Muslims may offer prayers inside and Hindus outside."
3087. In appeal, the District Judge, with respect to the existence of the structures at the premises in dispute, in judgment dated 18.03.1886, Exhibit A 27 (Suit-1), Register 7, page 319/320, observed:
"The entrance to the enclosure is under a gateway which pears the superscription "Allah" ---- immediately on the left is the platform a chabutara of masonry occupied by the Hindus. On this is a small superstructure of wood in the form of a tent.
This chabutara is said to indicate the birthplace of Ramchandra. In from of the gateway is the entry to the masonry platform of the masjid. A wall pierced here and there with railings divides the platform of the masjid from the enclosure on which stands the "Chabutara"." 3088. This position of the outer courtyard had continued thereafter inasmuch as when Suit-1 was filed on 16th January, 1950 the Civil Judge appointed an Advocate Commission of Sri Shiv Shankar Lal who also prepared a map wherein the three structures, i.e., Chabutara, Bhandar and Sita Rasoi have been shown to exist in the outer courtyard in same way. The plaintiffs have not placed any evidence to show that so far as the premises in outer courtyard, and these three structures are concerned, possession of Hindus was ever disturbed or denied or they were ever dispossessed. It is also not said that Muslims ever entered and visited premises in outer courtyard with animus possidendi, On the contrary it appears that during the fairs held at Ayodhya, i.e., Ramnavami fair etc., the rush of Hindu public used to swell so much so that the executive authorities found it necessary to have another gate for safety purposes and sometimes in 1873-74 this gate was constructed and opened in the northern wall which the defendants Hindu parties called "Singh Dwar". 3089. So far as the premises in the inner courtyard is concerned, it appears to be true that the Britishers divided the premises with the intention that the Muslims shall worship in the inner courtyard and Hindus in the outer courtyard but immediately since thereafter, i.e., from 1858 and onwards we find a lot of documents on record demonstrating that the Hindus continued to enter the premises in the inner courtyard also and offered worship thereat. There was no restriction in the entry inside the inner courtyard in any manner. The entrance door in the dividing grilled wall was never locked. It is difficult to hold that the possession of the premises inside the inner courtyard remain only with the plaintiffs. Here the "possession" means right possession, uninterfered possession by the unwanted person and capacity to control others interference. 3090. There is no evidence that the Muslims had the possession of the property in dispute after its construction in the form of mosque by a Muslim Ruler before Tieffenthaler' visit but on the contrary, Hindus continued to enter the disputed premises and worship thereat as we find mention, as long back as in 18th century, in the Travellers Account of Joseph Tieffinthaller who visited Oudh area between 1766-1771 and his write up was published in 1786. We have already quoted the relevant extract above. This fact was also reiterated in the subsequent Gazetteers of Edward Thornton which was published in 1858.
3091. The plaintiffs (Suit-4), however, have filed certain Statements of Account and Auditor's Report, orders under Section 92 CPC, waqf related documents etc. to claim that the maintenance of the building in dispute was entrusted to Mutawalli who was looking after the mosque and, therefore, symbolic possession of the building in dispute had to be with Muslims. We may have a bird eye view of these documents also.
3092. These documents can be placed in five categories,
(i) copies of revenue records; (ii) income-expenditure accounts;
(iii) the documents relating to repair of the damaged building in 1934 riot; (iv) the orders under Section 92 C.P.C.; and (v) correspondence with the Sunni Board regarding wakf and its registration etc. 3093. In the first category, i.e. copies of revenue records, comes the following:
(A) Exhibit A-30 (Suit-1) (Register 7, page 333-335) is a copy of the Khewat Patwari Mauza Bahoranpur of the period 1332 Fasli (1929 A.D.). In respect of certain plot number, it mentions the name of Mir Mohammad Zaki as Numberdar and in the column of partners it mentions the name of Mohd. Zaki, Amzad Ali and Mir Nazim.
This document relates to Mauza Bahoranpur's property wherein Mir Mohammad Zaki is shown as Numberdar. His successor, in his reply dated 20th November 1945 (Exhibit A-66, Suit-1), in para 9 has claimed that his property is not wakf but Nankar Maafi. We are not concerned with the said property of Mauza Bahoranpur and, therefore, do not propose to make any comment on the said document. Suffice is to say that this document does not help Muslim parties in any manner. (B) Exhibit A-37 (Suit-1) (Register 7, page 417) is a copy of Khasara Abadi Mashmoola Misil bandobast Sabik relating to Mauza Ramkot Pargana Haweli Awadh Tehsil and District Faizabad dated 20.03.1950. (C) Exhibit A-38 (Suit-1) (Register 7, page 419) is a copy of the Naqual Khasara Mashmoola Misil bandobast Sabik Mauza Ramkot Pargana Haweli Oudh Tehsil and District Faizabad.

(D) Exhibits A-39 and A-40 (Suit-1) (Register 7, pages 421 and 423) are the copies of the map Kishtwar Misil Bandobast Sabik Mauza Ramkot Pargana Haweli Tehsil and District Faizabad dated 09.03.1950 and Intekhab Naksha Abadi Mauza Ramkot Pargana Haweli Tehsil and District Faizabad.

(E) Exhibit A-41 (Suit-1) (Register 7, page 425) is a copy of the Khewat Mauza Bahoranpur.

3094. These revenue documents have been placed to show that there is mention of existence of a mosque in the area in dispute by referring plot area. The revenue entries do not create any right. When contested, particularly in a title suit, the facts have to be proved on their own. Even otherwise what is contained in the revenue entries would not show that a particular party was in possession. As we have already discussed above, the possession of the plaintiffs (Suit-4) even if we assume what they claim to be correct, is not of a continuous nature. The alleged Mutawalli of the disputed structure or the disputed waqf is not before the Court. Even the so called Pesh-Emam or Moazzim have not appeared even as a witness in this case. On the one hand the plaintiffs claim that till 1949 there was a Mutawalli, a Pesh-Emam and a Moazzim for maintaining the mosque as also taking care of regular Namaj by muslims but strangely none of them have taken any step as a result of the incident of 22/23 December 1949. There is not even a complaint by any of them what to say of their deposition as witness in these cases. It is contended that an affidavit of Pesh-Emam, Abdul Gaffar was filed in a writ petition pending before this Court against the order dated 01.02.1986 passed by the District Judge for opening of locks. We cannot take notice of such affidavit since the deponent has not appeared in the witness box offering himself for testifying creditworthiness of his averments. These revenue records, therefore, to our mind do not help the plaintiffs in any manner on the issue with which at present we are confronted with.

3095. The legal status of entry in revenue record was considered and the Court held that it does not confer ownership or title. Relying on an earlier decision in Jattu Ram Vs. Hakam Singh, 1993 (4) SCC 403, in Suraj Bhan Vs. Financial Commissioner, 2007 (6) SCC 186 the Apex Court said:

"9. ....It is well settled that an entry in revenue records does not confer title on a person whose name appears in record-of-rights. It is settled law that entries in the revenue records or jamabandi have only "fiscal purpose" i.e. payment of land revenue, and no ownership is conferred on the basis of such entries. So far as title to the property is concerned, it can only be decided by a competent civil court (vide Jattu Ram v. Hakam Singh 1993 (4) SCC 403)."
3096. In the second category, i.e, income-expenditure accounts comes:

(A) Exhibit A-72 (Suit-1) (Register 7, page 337-355) is a copy of the accounts alleged to be submitted by Syed Mohd. Zaki in Case No. 64 in the Court of Tahsildar Faizabad on 9th July 1925 for the period 18.04.1923 to 06.04.1924 with respect to the income from the grant of Mauza Bahoranpur and Sholapur.
(B) Exhibit A-31 (Suit-1) (Register 7, page 357-377) is a copy of the accounts alleged to be submitted by Syed Mohd. Zaki in Case No. 64 in the Court of Tahsildar Faizabad on 31.03.1926 for the period 07.04.1924 to 28.03.1925 with respect to the income from the grant of Mauza Bahoranpur and Sholapur.

(C) Exhibit A-32 (Suit-1) (Register 7, page 379-399) is a copy of the accounts alleged to be submitted by Syed Mohd. Zaki in Case No. 64 in the Court of Tahsildar Faizabad on 23.08.1927 for the period 29.03.1925 to 24.04.1926 with respect to the income from the grant of Mauza Bahoranpur and Sholapur.

(D) Exhibit A-33 (Suit-1) (Register 7, page 401-407) is a copy of the accounts alleged to be submitted by Syed Mohd. Zaki in Case No. 64 in the Court of Tahsildar Faizabad for the period 25.09.1941 to 12.09.1945 with ‫‪2899‬‬ ‫‪respect to the income from the grant of Mauza‬‬ ‫‪Bahoranpur and Sholapur.‬‬ ‫‪(E) Exhibit A-35 (Suit-1) (Register 7, page 413) is a copy‬‬ ‫‪of accounts of income and expenditure relating to 1.4.1947‬‬ ‫‪to 31.03.1948 as per Section 57 of U.P. Muslim Waqf Act,‬‬ ‫‪1936.‬‬ ‫‪(F) Exhibit A-36 (Suit-1) (Register 7, page 415-‬‬ ‫‪416)=Exhibit A-54 (Suit-1) (Register 8, page 501) is said‬‬ ‫‪to be a copy of the auditor's report for the period 1947-‬‬ ‫‪1948 finalized on 27.07.1948 and contains following‬‬ ‫‪noting on page 416:‬‬ ‫وقف ‪ ۲۶‬فیض آباد کے خدمات کی جانچ کی گءی۔ انہوں نے بتایا کہ سابق‬ ‫متولی کے بیان سے نہ توکاغذات وقف بنے ہیں اور نہ یہ معلوم ہوسکا کہ کیا‬ ‫بقایا ہے اور کیا تحویل ہے ۔ وقف کی امدنی ‪ ۵۰۰‬روپیہ سے زاءد ہیں۔‬ ‫جسکی وصولی تحصیل جواد حسیر صاحب نے اکتوبر ‪ ۱۷‬سے کی ہے‬ ‫جسکی وجہ سے صرف ‪ ۸۲‬روپیہ وصول ہو سکیں ہیںپیچھل مطالبہ بورڑ‬ ‫بھی معلوم نہیں کہ وصول ہوا ہے یا نہیں دفتر سے ڈیمانڈ نوٹس جاری کیا‬ ‫جاءے تاکہ متولی جواد حساین کو معلوم ہو سکے کہ کیا بقایا ہے انہوں نے‬ ‫استدعا کی ہے کہ پیچھل مطالبہ سابق متولیان سے لیا جاءے دفتر سے اس‬ ‫سلسلہ میں مناسب اقدام کیا جاءے میں نے ان کو ہدایت کر دی ہے کہ وہ‬ ‫حسابات وغیرہ باقاعدہ لکھیں۔‬ ‫دستخط‬ ‫‪27.8.48‬‬ ‫دفتر کے متعلقہ کلرک ڈیمانڈ نوٹس جاری کرتے وقت مطالبہ بورڈ کی‬ ‫تسخیص ‪ ۵۰۰‬روپیہ پر کریں اطلعًا تحریر ہے لکھیں تحریر ہے لکھیں‬ ‫تاکہ ڈیمانڈ رجسٹر میں غلط اندراج نہ ہو جاءے۔‬ ‫‪"Inspected the accounts of Imam Waqf number 26. He told‬‬ ‫‪that the previous Mutwalli did not possess any documents‬‬ ‫‪and as such it could not be ascertained as to how much‬‬ ‫‪amount is due and how much is in arrears. The income of‬‬ the Waqf is more than Rs. 500/- which is realized by Jawad Husain Saheb from October 17, as a result of which only Rs. 82/- could be realized and it is also not known as to whether previous dues or arrears are being recovered or not. Demand notice be issued by the office so that Mutwalli Jawad Husain may know as to the amount in arrears. He has desired that earlier accounts be demanded from the previous Mutwalli. Appropriate steps be taken by the office in this behalf. I have instructed him to maintain proper accounts.

Concerned clerk in the office while issuing demand notice should write separately that the amount of demand fixed by the Board is Rs.500/- so that no incorrect entry is incorporated in the demand register." (E.T.C.) (G) Exhibit A-60 (Suit-1) (Register 8, page 513) is a copy of the statement in Form 38 U.P. Muslim Waqf Act NO. 13 of 1936 with respect to annual income of the waqf property from rural property, Hajjam (Barbars), houses and shops etc containing the note dated 27.9.1943 of Inspector Wakfs that amount realized under a particular head has not been shown. It reads:

‫دفتر سنی سنٹرل بورڈ آف وقف یو۔ پی۔ لکھنوء‬ ‫ مشمولہ مثل۔۔‬۱۹۳۶ ‫ سن‬۱۳ ‫۔ یو۔پی۔ مسلم وقف ایکٹ نمبر‬۳۸ ‫ذیل فارم رجسٹری وقف زیر دفعہ‬ ۲۶ ‫نمبر سلسلہ‬ ‫ضلع کا نام و تحصیل و گاءوں جاءداد موقوفہ موضع بہورن پور و آراضی شعلہ‬ ‫پوری بحال بہورن پور پرگنہ حویلی اودھ تحصیل و ضلع فیض آباد‬ ‫نام وقف مع ولدیت و سکونت۔۔۔ کوءی وقف نہیں ہے۔ عطیہ شہنشاہ بابر و نواب‬ ‫سعادت علی خاں‬ ‫متولیان و دیگر اشخاس کے نام جو انتظام وقف سے مطعلق ہوں مع پورا پتہ‬ ۴/۵ ‫محمد ذکی و کلب حسین ایک قتہ‬ ‫‪2901‬‬ ‫جواد حسین و محمد حسین و عابد حسین ‪۴/۵‬‬ ‫نورالحسن و ابو محمد و غلم اصغر ‪۴/۵‬‬ ‫دستاویز وقف یا رسم و رواج کے مطابق متولیان کے عہدہ کی جانشینی کا طریقہ‬ ‫نمبردار بحال معافی انتظامات کرتا رہتا ہے کوءی خاص قاءدہ اور نہیں ہے‬ ‫انتظام وقف کی اسکیم کی تفصیلت۔۔۔۔ مسجد مذکور کی سفیدی و مرمت و فرش‬ ‫روشنی وغیرہ اور تنخواہ معذن و پیش امام و خرچہ رمضان شریف و عیدگاہ‬ ‫حالیہ کا انتظام بھی ہوتا ہے جو فرد حساب میں درج ہے‬ ‫وقف کے متعلق تمام دستاویزات استحقاق اور دیگر دستاویزات متعلقہ کی بابت‬ ‫تفصیلت ۔۔۔۔ موضع بہورن پور ‪۳۵۱/۶۰‬‬ ‫‪۱۷۷/۸‬‬ ‫بحال بہورن پور‬ ‫آراضی شعلہ پوری‬ ‫جاءدادہاے موقوفہ کی تفصیلت جو شناخت کے لءے کافی ہوں۔۔۔۔ کوءی وقف نامہ‬ ‫نہیں ہے۔ صرف سند نانکار ہے منجانب گورنمنٹ‬ ‫جاءدادہاے موقوفہ کی سالنہ آمدنی ۔۔۔۔۔ ‪۱۵۲‬روپیہ‬ ‫آراضی دیہات سے۔۔۔۔ ججام مرطب ‪ ۱۴‬روپیہ‬ ‫مرمت مکانات وغیرہ ۔۔۔‬ ‫دیگر ذراءع سے۔۔۔۔۔ ‪ ۳۰۵‬روپیہ‬ ‫میزان‬ ‫‪ ۱۰‬سرکاری مالگذاری ابواب۔ لگان اور ٹیکس جو جاءداد ہاءے موقوفہ بابتہ‬ ‫سالنہ ابواب رقم سے‬ ‫گورمنٹ کو سالنہ واجب الدا ہو‬ ‫سالن ہ مصارف کی تفصی ہلت بموجب دستاویز یا رسم ورواج‬ ‫خییرچ تحصیییل وصییول مبلییغ ۔۔۔۔۔۔ بطورحییق نمییبرداری ملییک حسیین‬ ‫‪۱۱‬‬ ‫نمبردار۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔‬ ‫تنخواہ متولی۔۔۔۔۔۔محمد ذکی حسین ‪240/00‬‬ ‫‪ ۱۲‬الف‬ ‫جواد حسین وغیرہ ‪۸۴‬۔‪۵‬۔ نمبر لزمی معہ جمعہ ‪۲۶۵‬‬ ‫نورالحسن وغیرہ ۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔‬ ‫خیراتی اغراض۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔مخصوص مذہبی کام کے لءے‬ ‫ب‬ ‫خاندان سے مراد ‪؎۱‬واقف کے والیدین ‪ ؎۲‬واقییف کیی زوجیہ یییا وافقیہ کیا شیوہر‬ ‫‪ ؎۳‬واقف کی اولد ‪ ؎۴‬دیگر افراد جییو واقییف سیے اسییکے کسییی مورشییا مییرد‬ ‫عورت کے ذریعہ رشتہ رکھتے ہوں ‪؎۵‬وہ افراد جو واقف کے ساتھ رہتے ہوں یییا‬ ‫اسکے زیر پرورش ہوں۔‬ ‫‪ ۱۳‬کل پس ماندہ رقم جو متولی کے پاس جمع ہو ۔۔۔۔کوءی رقم جمع نہیں ہے۔‬ ‫ دیگر تفصیلت ۔ جاءداد مذکور میں بہت سے کھوٹ دار ہیں سالنہ حصہ پاتے‬۱۴ ‫ہیں۔ جو مسجد کے سالنہ خرچہ سے بچتا ہے اور نمییبردار کییو حییق نمییبرداری‬ ‫ملتا ہے۔‬ ‫ء‬۱۹۴۳ ‫۔ستمبر‬۴۶‫ تاریخ جسمیں رجسٹرکیلءے درخواست دی گءی ہو۔۔۔۔۔۔‬۱۵ ‫کیفیت۔ نوٹ۔ فی الحال جملیہ ک ھوٹ داران وقییف نہییں تسییلیم کرتیے ہییں بلکیہ‬ ‫نانکار معافی کہتے ہیں لہذا ہم لوگوں کو اپنے حق کے لءے استقرار کا دعوی‬ ‫عدالت مجاز میں کرنے کا ارادہ ہے جسکا موقعہ بضابطہ عطا فرما یا جاوے‬ ‫میں بحلف تصدیق کرتا ہوں کہ مندرجہ بال اطلعات بالکل صحیح اور درست ہیں‬ ‫اور میں نے کوءی بات سنی سنٹرل بورڈ آف وقف سے پوشیدہ نہیں رکھی ہے۔‬ Office of the Sunni Central Board of Waqf, U.P., Lucknow.
Register under Section 38 of U.P. Muslim Waqf Act No.13 of 1936.

2.Name of the Village Bahoranpur and Arazi District and Tehsil, Sholapuri Bahal, Pargana Havei, village and property Oud, District Faizabad. Mauqoofa

3. Name of the There is no waqf, Atiya Emperor Waqf, parentage Babar and Nawab Saadat Ali Khan and the place of its existence

4. Name of Mohd. Zaki, Kalbe Husain persons related to (Numberdar Moazzin Kalbe management of Hussain) Waqf with complete Javvad Hussain. Mohammad address Hussain and Abid Hussain Nurul Hasan, Abu Mohammad and Ghulam Asghar......................Rs.4/5

5. Documents of Numberdar Bahal Mafi makes Waqf or the method arrangement and there is no of selection for the other special rule.

office of Mutwallis as per custom.

6.Details of scheme Arrangement of whitewash and of Waqf repairs of the aforesaid Mosque, lighting, salary of Moazzin and Pesh Imam, expenditure on Ramzan Sharif and Masjid Eidgah and other necessary works are done, which are entered in the account sheet.

7. Details of various Mauza Bahoranpur... 351/6/- documents relating Arazi Sholapuri ..... 177/8 to Waqf as well as other documents

8.Details of There is no waqfnama. Only Maukufa property certificate of Nankar issued by the which is adequate Government is there.

for identification

9.Annual income of 152/-

Maukoofa property From Aarazi village 14/- (Hazam Murattab) From shops etc. -

Total:                 Rs.305/-
10.              Govt. Illegible
Malguzari, Abwab,
Lagaan and Taxes
which is to be paid
annually regarding
maukoofa property
and was paid to the
Government
annually.
Details of annual expenditure according to documents or customs.

11. Expenditure on Mohd. Zaki and Nikhat Tehsil and Hasan.................74/50 recovered Rs.......... Javvad Hussain etc..84/50 as right of Nurul Hasan etc.. 84/50 Numbardari, ..............................Rs.240/-

Numberdar Malik Towards wages: Rs. 265
Hasan
(a)     Salary      to For special religious work and
Mutwalli               other work........(illegible)

(b) For      donation
purposes

11.Total remaining No amount is in balance with the balance with the Mutawalli.

Mutawalli.

12. Other details There are a number of Khewatdaar in the Waqf property aforesaid who are being PAID their share out of the remaining amount after annual expenditure of the Masjid and the Numberdars gets their right of Numberdari.

13. Date in 26th September 1943 application for registration was moved Note: At present all the Khewatdaars do not recognize it as waqf, instead they call it Nankar Maafi. Therefore we are intending to file a suit in the Court for our rights for which permission be granted.

I state on oath that the above information are correct to the best of my knowledge and belief and nothing has been concealed from the Waqf Board."

(H) Exhibit A-55 (Suit-1) (Register 8, page 503) is a copy of the account of income and expenditure with respect to the year 1947-48 and reads as under:.

‫سنی سن ٹرل وقف بور ڈ یو ۔پی لک ھنؤ‬ ‫ء حسب دفعہ‬۱۹۴۸ ‫مارچ‬۳۱ ‫ء لغایت‬۱۹۴۷ ‫ذیل حساب آمدنی و خرچ بابتہ سال یکم اکتوبر‬ ‫ مسجد بابری ضلع فیض آباد‬۲۶ ‫ مشمولہ مثل دفعہ‬.....‫ء‬۱۹۳۶ ‫ یو۔پی مسلم وقف ایکٹ‬۵۷ ‫نام وقف یا واقییف بادشییاہ بییابر‬ ۲۶ ‫نمبر وقف‬ ‫نام ضلع ۔۔۔۔فیض آباد‬ ‫نام متولی جواد حسین‬ ‫سییال گزشییتہ نسییبت جییاءداد موقییوفہ‬ ‫ الف رقم غیییر وصییول شییدہ‬۱ ‫زرعی و سکنی‬ ‫ڈگریات‬ ‫ب‬ ۹۸ ‫ الف لگان نسبت جاءداد زرعی جوبابتہ سال حال واجب الوصول ہو‬۲ ۱۶ ‫ب آمدنی سیر و خود کاشت‬ ‫ج آمدنی ساءر )باغات تالب جنگلت وغیرہ معہ تفصیل‬ ‫‪2905‬‬ ‫کرایہ مکانات دو کانات و آراضی سکنی‬ ‫د‬ ‫دیگر آمدنی‬ ‫ر‬ ‫‪۲۷/۴‬‬ ‫مال گزاری سرکاری ٹیکس واجب الداہو‬ ‫‪۳‬‬ ‫‪۷۰/۱۲‬‬ ‫خالص آمدنی بعد منہاءی مال گزاری ٹیکس‬ ‫‪۴‬‬ ‫رقم جو ادس کی اولد یا خاندان کیلءےیا کسی نجی کام‬ ‫‪ ۵‬الف‬ ‫کیلءے ازروءے وقف نامہ واجب الداہو‬ ‫رقم جو ازروےوقف نامہ براءے کار خیر واجب الدا ہو‬ ‫ب‬ ‫کسی قسم کا قرضہ یا باریااداءیگی جو ذمہ جاءد موقوفہ شروع‬ ‫‪۶‬‬ ‫ل بار کرایہ مالگزاری ابواب ٹیکس و‬ ‫سال واجب تھا )مث ً‬ ‫تنخواہ یا مال گزارہ یا ڈگری وغیرہ‬ ‫کسی قسم کا قرضہ یا باریااداءیگی جو ذمہ جاءد موقوفہ آخر‬ ‫‪۷‬‬ ‫ل بار کرایہ مالگزاری ابواب ٹیکس و‬ ‫سال واجب تھا )مث ً‬ ‫تنخواہ یا مال گزارہ یا ڈگری وغیرہ‬ ‫قرض دیا ہوا روپیہ یا بینک میں جمع شدہ جو سال کے شروع‬ ‫‪۸‬‬ ‫میں تھا۔‬ ‫قرض دیا ہوا روپیہ یا بینک میں جمع شدہ جو سییال ک یے آخییر‬ ‫‪۹‬‬ ‫میں تھا۔‬ ‫ر‬ ‫آنہ‬ ‫پ‬ ‫واقعی خرچ اندرون سال‬ ‫ر‬ ‫آ‬ ‫پا‬ ‫واقعی ّآمدنی اندرون سال‬ ‫‪27 4‬‬ ‫‪-‬‬ ‫‪ ۱‬سرکاری مالگذاری و ابواب‬ ‫‪ ۱‬ال وصولی ازبقایا سال گزشتہ‬ ‫ٹیکس‬ ‫ف بابتہ جاءداد زرعی و سکنی‬ ‫‪ ۲‬مطالبہ وقف بورڈ معہ حوالہ‬ ‫ب وصولی ازبقایا سال گزشتہ‬ ‫نمبر و تاریخ رسید‬ ‫بابتہ ڈگریات‬ ‫‪----------------‬‬ ‫‪82 -‬‬ ‫‪-‬‬ ‫‪ ۲‬ال لگان‬ ‫ف‬ ‫‪12 8‬‬ ‫‪-‬‬ ‫‪ ۳ 16 -‬صرف تحصیل وصول و‬ ‫‪-‬‬ ‫ب سیر و خود کاشت‬ ‫انتظام جاءداد‬ ‫‪ ۴‬صرفہ مرمت و تعمیرجاءداد‬ ‫ج ساءر باغات جنگلت تالب‬ ‫وغیرہ معہ تفصیل‬ ‫‪ ۵‬اخراجات مقدمات‬ ‫‪------------------- - -‬‬ ‫‪56‬‬ ‫‪ ۶‬مسجد‬ ‫‪------------------- - -‬‬ ‫‪ ۷‬مدرسہ‬ ‫‪------------------- - -‬‬ ‫‪ ۸‬نزر دینا زد فاتحہ‬ ‫‪------------------- - -‬‬ ‫‪ ۹‬خیرات و امداد و غرباء و‬ ‫د کرایہ مکانات و دوکانات و‬ ‫مساکین‬ ‫آراضیات سکنی‬ ‫‪ ۱‬دیگر امور خیر مطابق وقف‬ ‫ر دیگر آمدنی معہ تفصیل‬ ‫‪ ۰‬نامہ‬ ‫‪ ۱‬تنخواہ متولی اگر ہو‬ ‫‪ ۳‬ال جو روپیہ بینک سے نکالگیا‬ ‫‪۱‬‬ ‫ف‬ ‫‪ ۱‬رقم جو واقف یا واقف کے‬ ‫ب جو روپیہ قرض کا وصول‬ ‫‪ ۲‬خاندان کو ازروے وقف نامہ‬ ‫ہوا‬ ‫دی گءی ہو۔‬ ‫‪ ۱‬اخراجات متفرق‬ ‫ جو روپیہ بینک میں جمع کیا‬۱ ‫ گیا۔‬۴ ‫ جو روپیہ قرض دیا گیا۔‬۱ 95 12 - ‫میزان اخراجات‬ 98 - - ‫میزان کل‬ 2 4 ‫پسماندہ رقم معہ تفصیل جہان‬ ‫تحویل جو شروع سال تھی‬ ‫جمع ہو‬ (؎۲ ‫مطابق نوٹ‬ ‫؎دکھلءی‬۲ ‫مطابق نوٹ‬ ‫دکھلءی جاوے‬ ‫جاوے‬ 98 - - ‫میزان کل‬ 98 - - ‫میزان کل‬ ‫کل رقم مطالبہ جو واجب الوصول میں سے وصول ہونے سے باقی رہ گءی ۔۔۔۔۔۔۔‬ ‫میں بحلف تصدیق کرتا ہوں کہ مندرجہ بال اندراجات و رسیدات متعلقہ جنکی‬ ‫صحت و اصلیت کی جانچ میں نے کرلی ہے میرے علم و یقین میں صحیح و درست‬ ‫ہیں اور میں نے کوءی بات پوشیدہ نہیں رکھی۔‬ ‫دستخط متولی معہ پورا پتہ‬ ‫جواد حسین بقلم نورالحسن ساکن سنہواں‬ ‫ڈاکخانہ درشن نگرضلع فیض آباد‬ Sunni Central Waqf Board U.P. Lucknow Statement of income and expenditure from 1st October 1947 to March 31, 1948 under section 57 U.P. Muslim Waqf Act 1936, included in File no. 26 Masjid Babri.

Name of District : Faizabad Number of Waqf. : 26.

Name of the Waqf or Waqif ..Badshah Babar. Name of Mutawalli- Jawad Husain.

1(Alif) Outstanding amount of the previous year in respect of Waqf property. Agricultural and residential plots. (Bay)..............

2 (Alif) Rent in respect of agricultural land of previous year which is yet to be realized Rs. 98/-.

(Bay) Income from seer and self cultivation Rs. 16=98 (Jeem) Income (Sair orchards, ponds, forests etc) with details..

(Dal) Rent from houses and shops and residential plots.. (Rey) other income. ....

3 Malguzari of the Govt. and taxes to be paid Rs.27/4/- 4 Net income after deducting Malguzari and taxes...Rs.

5 (Alif) Amount to be paid to the relations of the Waqif, or reserved for some other personal as per waqfnama.... (Bey) Amount which is to be spent on charitable purposes. 6 Any debt or encumbrances outstanding in the beginning of the year, e.g. Rent, Malguzari Abwab, Tax and Salaries or Pension or Degrees etc. 7 Any loans or outstanding debt on the waqf property e.g. rent at the end of the year.(e.g.Rent, Malguzari Abwab, Tax and Salaries or Pension or Degrees etc. 8 Amount given as loan and the amount deposited in the bank, in the beginning of the year.

9 Amount of loan or deposited in the bank at the end of the year.

Total Net Rs. Total expenditure during Rs.

Income of As.          the year                 As.Ps.
the    Waqf Ps.
during the
year
1.(A)                  1. Govt. Malguzari Abwab 27-4-0
Receipt of             Tax
arrears of             2.Demand of the Board
the previous           with reference no. and date
year        in         of the receipt.
respect of
agricultural           3.Expenditure    on    Tehsil
land     and                                           12-8-0
                       wasool and management of
residential
plots.                 property.
                       4. Expenditure on repair of
(Bey)
                       waqf property.


Receipt               5. Expenditure on litigation
from      the         6. Litigation on mosque      56-0
degrees of            7. Madrasa litigation
the previous          8. Nazro, Niyaj and Fateha
year.                 9. Charity and help to the
2.(Alif)       82-0-0 poor.
Lagan                 10. Other charities as per
                      Waqf Names
(Bey) Seer 16-0-0 11. Salary of Mutawalli, if and self any.

cultivation           12. Amount paid to the
                      Waqif or his family as per
(Jeem) Sair,          Waqf nama.
orchards,             13.            Miscellaneous
forest,               expenditure
ponds etc.            14. Amount deposited in the
(give                 bank.
details)              15. Amount given as loan.

(Dal) , Rent           Total amount               95-12
of houses,
shops and              Previous balance           02-4-0
residential
plots.                 Total expenditure Balance
                       with details where it is
(Rey) other            deposited as per note no. 2 98-0-0
income with
details
1.(Alif)
Amount with
drawan
from      the
bank
(Bey)
Amount of
loan
received.

Total
Balance as 98-0-0 Total expenditure Balance per note no. with details where it is 2 deposited as per note no. 2 98-0-0 Grand 98-0-0 Grand Total 98-0-0 ‫‪2909‬‬ ‫‪Total‬‬ ‫‪Total amount of the demand of the Board which is yet to be‬‬ ‫‪realized.‬‬ ‫‪I verify on oath that I have checked the entries and‬‬ ‫‪receipts there of which are correct to the best of knowledge‬‬ ‫‪and belief and nothing has been concealed.‬‬ ‫‪Signature and Address of the Mutawalli.‬‬ ‫"‪Sd/- Jawad Husain S/o Noorul Hasan R/o Sahanwa.‬‬ ‫‪(I) Exhibit A-57 (Suit-1) (Register 8, page 507) is a copy‬‬ ‫‪of account of income and expenditure with respect to the‬‬ ‫‪period from 1.4.1948 to 31.3.1949 and reads as under:‬‬ ‫سنی سن ٹرل وقف بور ڈ یو ۔پی لک ھنؤ‬ ‫ذیل حساب آمدنی و خرچ بابتہ سال یکم اکتوبر ‪۱۹۴۷‬ء لغایت ‪۳۱‬مارچ ‪۱۹۴۸‬ء حسب دفعہ ‪۵۷‬‬ ‫یو۔پی مسلم وقف ایکٹ ‪۱۹۳۶‬ء مشمولہ میں ‪ ۴۶‬مسجد بابری ضلع فیض آباد‬ ‫نام متولی جواد حسین‬ ‫نام وقف یا واقف بادشاہ بابر‬ ‫نام ضلع فیض آباد نمبر وقف ‪۲۶‬‬ ‫رقم غیر وصول شدہ۔۔۔۔۔۔ سال گزشتہ نسبت جاءداد موقوفہ زرعی و سکنی‬ ‫‪ ۱‬الف‬ ‫۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔ڈگریات‬ ‫ب‬ ‫لگان نسبت جاءداد زرعی جوبابتہ سال حال واجب الوصول ہو۔‬ ‫‪ ۲‬الف‬ ‫‪531/2/-‬‬ ‫آمدنی سیر و خود کاشت۔‬ ‫ب‬ ‫آمدنی ساءر باغات تالب جنگلت وغیرہ معہ تفصیل‬ ‫ج‬ ‫کرایہ مکانات دو کانات و آراضی سکتی‬ ‫د‬ ‫دیگر آمدنی‬ ‫ر‬ ‫‪39/9/6‬‬ ‫واجب الداہو۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔ابواب ٹیکس‬ ‫مال گزاری سرکاری ٹیکس‬ ‫‪۳‬‬ ‫خالص آمدنی بعد منہاءی مال گزاری ٹیکس۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔‪70/12‬‬ ‫‪۴‬‬ ‫رقم جو ادس کی اولد یا خاندان کیلءےیا کی نجی کام کیلءے ازروءے وقف‬ ‫‪ ۵‬الف‬ ‫نامہ واجب الداہو‬ ‫رقم جو ازروےوقف نامہ براءے کار خیر واجب الدا ہو۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔‬ ‫ب‬ ‫کسی قسم کا قرضہ یا باریااداءیگی جو ذمہ جاءد موقوفہ شروع سال واجب تھا‬ ‫‪۶‬‬ ‫ل بار کرایہ مالگزاری ابواب ٹیکس و تنخواہ یا گزارہ یا ڈگری وغیرہ‬ ‫)مش ً‬ ‫کسی قسم کا قرضہ یا باریااداءیگی جو ذمہ جاءد موقوفہ آخر سال واجب تھا‬ ‫‪۷‬‬ ‫ل بار کرایہ مالگزاری ابواب ٹیکس و تنخواہ یا گزارہ یا ڈگری وغیرہ‬ ‫)مش ً‬ ‫قرض دیا ہوا روپیہ با بینک میں جمع شدہ جو سال کے شروع میں تھا۔‬ ‫‪۸‬‬ ‫قرض دیا ہوا روپیہ با بینک میں جمع شدہ جو سال کے آخر میں تھا۔‬ ‫‪۹‬‬ ‫ر‬ ‫پ آ‬ ‫واقعی خرچ اندرون سال‬ ‫ر‬ ‫پا آ‬ ‫واقعی ّآمدنی اندرون سال‬ ‫‪2910‬‬ ‫‪39‬‬ ‫‪9 6‬‬ ‫‪ ۱‬سرکاری مالگذاریو ابواب‬ ‫‪ ۱‬ال وصولی ازبقایا سال گزشتہ‬ ‫ٹیکس‬ ‫ف بابتہ جاءداد زرعی و سکنی‬ ‫‪ ۲‬مطالبہ وقف بورڈ معہ حوالہ‬ ‫ب وصولی ازبقایا سال گزشتہ‬ ‫نمبر و تاریخ رسید‬ ‫بابتہ ڈگریات‬ ‫‪----------------‬‬ ‫‪400 - -‬‬ ‫‪ ۲‬ال لگان‬ ‫ف‬ ‫‪12‬‬ ‫‪- -‬‬ ‫‪ ۳‬صرف تحصیل وصول و‬ ‫‪- -‬‬ ‫ب سیر و خود کاشت‬ ‫انتظام جاءداد‬ ‫‪ ۴‬صرفہ مرمت ع تعمیرجاءداد‬ ‫ج ساءر باغات جنگلت‬ ‫تالب وغیرہ معہ تفصیل‬ ‫‪ ۵‬اخراجات مقدمات‬ ‫‪------------------- - -‬‬ ‫‪202‬‬ ‫‪- -‬‬ ‫‪ ۶‬مسجد‬ ‫‪------------------- - -‬‬ ‫‪ ۷‬مدرسہ‬ ‫‪------------------- - -‬‬ ‫‪ ۸‬نزر دینا زد فاتحہ‬ ‫‪------------------- - -‬‬ ‫‪ ۹‬خیرات و امداد و غرباء و‬ ‫د کرایہ مکانات و دوکانات و‬ ‫مساکین‬ ‫آراضیات سکنی‬ ‫‪ ۱۰‬دیگر امور خیر مطابق وقف‬ ‫ر دیگر آمدنی معہ تفصیل‬ ‫نامہ‬ ‫‪ ۱۱‬تنخواہ متولی اگر ہو‬ ‫‪ ۳‬ال جو روپیہ بینک سے‬ ‫ف نکالگیا‬ ‫‪ ۱۲‬رقم جو واقف یا واقف کے‬ ‫ب جو روپیہ قرض کا وصول‬ ‫خاندان کو ازروے وقف نامہ‬ ‫ہوا‬ ‫دی گءی ہو۔‬ ‫‪ ۱۳‬اخراجات متفرق‬ ‫‪ ۱۴‬جو روپیہ بینک میں جمع کیا‬ ‫گیا۔‬ ‫‪ ۱۵‬جو روپیہ قرض دیا گیا۔‬ ‫‪253 9 6‬‬ ‫میزان اخراجات‬ ‫‪400 - -‬‬ ‫میزان کل‬ ‫پسماندہ رقم معہ تفصیل جہان ‪156 6 6‬‬ ‫تحویل جو شروع سال تھی‬ ‫جمع ہو‬ ‫مطابق نوٹ ‪(؎۲‬‬ ‫مطابق نوٹ ‪؎۲‬دکھلءی‬ ‫دکھلءی جاوے‬ ‫جاوے‬ ‫‪400‬‬ ‫‪- -‬‬ ‫میزان کل‬ ‫‪400 - -‬‬ ‫میزان کل‬ ‫کل رقم مطالبہ جو واجب الوصول میں سے وصول ہونے سے باقی رہ گءی ‪۱۳۱/۲‬‬ ‫میں بحلف تصدیق کرتا ہوں کہ مندرجہ بال اندراجات و رسیدات متعلقہ جنکی صحت و‬ ‫اصلیت کی جانچ میں نے کرلی ہے میرے علم و یقین میں صحیح و درست ہیں اور میں‬ ‫نے کوءی بات پوشیدہ نہیں رکھی۔ مجھے متولی جواد حسین صاحب نے مجاز کیا ہے‬ ‫کہ ان کی طرف سے حساب جانچ کر آوں۔‬ ‫دستخط متولی معہ پورا پتہ‬ ‫نورالحسن ساکن سنہوان ڈاکخانہ درشن نگر‬ ‫ضلع فیض آباد‬ ‫‪Sunni Central Waqf Board U.P. Lucknow‬‬ ‫‪Statement of income and expenditure from 1st April 1948 to‬‬ 31st March, 1949 under section 57 U.P. Muslim Waqf Act 1936, included in File no. 26 Masjid Babri Name of the District: Faizabad Waqf no. : 26.

Name of the Waqf and Waqif ..Badshah Babar. Name of Mutawalli- Jawad Husain.

1. (Alif) Outstanding amount of the previous year in respect of Waqf property, agricultural and residential plots. (B).......

2. (Alif) Rent in respect of agricultural land of previous year which is yet to be realized Rs. 531/-20 (Bay) Income from seer and self cultivation .... (Jeem) Income (Sair orchards, ponds, forests etc) with details..

(Dal) Rent from houses and shops and residential plots.. (Rey) other income. ....

3. Malguzari of the Govt. and taxes to be paid Rs.39/9/6

4. Net income after deducting Malguzari and taxes...

5. (Alif) Amount to be paid to the relations of the Waqif, or reserved for some other personal as per waqfnama.... (Bey) Amount which is to be spent on charitable purposes.

6. Any debt or encumbrances outstanding in the beginning of the year, e.g. Rent, Malguzari Abwab, Tax and Salaries or Pension or Degrees etc.

7. Any loans or outstanding debt on the waqf property e.g. rent at the end of the year.(e.g.Rent, Malguzari Abwab, Tax and Salaries or Pension or Degrees etc.

8.Amount given as loan and the amount deposited in the bank, in the beginning of the year.

9. Amount of loan or deposited in the bank at the end of the year.

Total Net Rs. As. Total expenditure during Rs.

Income of Ps.        the year                 As.Ps.
the    Waqf
during the
year
1.(A)                1. Govt. Malguzari Abwab 39-9-6
Receipt of           Tax
arrears of           2.Demand of the Board
the                  with reference no. and date
previous             of the receipt.
year      in
respect of           3.Expenditure on Tehsil
agricultural         wasool and management of 12/-
land     and         property.
residential 4. Expenditure on repair of plots. waqf property.

5. Expenditure on litigation (Bey) 6. Litigation on mosque 202-0 Receipt 7. Madrasa litigation from the 8. Nazro, Niyaj and Fateha degrees of 9. Charity and help to the the poor.

previous 10. Other charities as per year. Waqf Names

2.(Alif) 400/- 11. Salary of Mutawalli, if Lagan any.

12. Amount paid to the (Bey) Seer Waqif or his family as per and self Waqf nama.

cultivation 13. Miscellaneous expenditure (Jeem) 14. Amount deposited in the bank.

Sair,

15. Amount given as loan.

orchards,
forest,
                     Total amount
ponds      etc.
                     Previous balance
(give
details)             Total          expenditure 253-9-6
                     Balance    with     details


(Dal) , Rent               where it is deposited as 156-6-6
of     houses,             per note no. 2
shops     and
residential
plots.

(Rey) other
income with
details
2.(Alif)
Amount
withdrawn
from       the
bank
(Bey)
Amount of
loan
received.

Total            400/-0 Total                           400-0
Total amount of the demand of the Board which is yet to be realized. Rs.131-2 Anna I verify on oath that I have checked the entries and receipts there of which are correct to the best of knowledge and belief and nothing has been concealed. Signature and Address of the Mutawalli.

Sd/- Jawad Husain S/o Noorul Hasan R/0 Sahanwa, Darshan Nagar, district Faizabad."

(J) Exhibit A-59 (Suit-1) (Register 8, page 511) is a copy of the Statement of income and expenditure for the period from 1.4.1949 to 31.3.1950 under section 57 U.P. Muslim Waqf Act 1936, included in 26 Masjid Babri District Faizabad. It reads:

‫‪2914‬‬ ‫سنی سن ٹرل وقف بور ڈ یو ۔پی لک ھنؤ‬ ‫ذیل حساب آمدنی و خرچ بابتہ سال یکم اکتوبر ‪۱۹۴۹‬ء لغایت ‪۳۱‬مارچ ‪۱۹۵۰‬ء حسب دفعہ ‪۵۷‬‬ ‫یو۔پی مسلم وقف ایکٹ ‪۱۹۳۶‬ء مشمولہ مثل وقف نمبر ‪ ۴۶‬مسجد بابری ضلع فیض آباد‬ ‫نام ضلع فیض آباد نمبر وقف ‪ ۲۶‬نام وقف یا واقف بادشاہ بابر نام متولی ۔۔۔۔۔جواد حسین‬ ‫روپییییییییییہ‬ ‫‪ ۱‬الف رقم غیروصول شدہ۔۔۔۔۔۔۔ سال گزشتہ نسبت جاءداد موقوفہ زرعی و‬ ‫‪۱۰۰‬‬ ‫سکنی‬ ‫ب ۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔ڈگریات‬ ‫‪۵۳۱/۱۰/۱‬‬ ‫‪ ۲‬الف لگان نسبت جاءداد زرعی جوبابتہ سال حال واجب الوصول ہو۔‬ ‫ب آمدنی سیر و خود کاشت۔‬ ‫‪۵۳۱/۱۰/۱‬‬ ‫ج آمدنی ساءر باغات تالب جنگلت وغیرہ معہ تفصیل ۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔‬ ‫د کرایہ مکانات دو کانات و آراضی سکتی ۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔‬ ‫ر دیگر آمدنی ۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔‬ ‫‪۴۱/۳/۴‬‬ ‫مال گزاری سرکاری ٹیکس ۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔واجب الداہو‬ ‫‪۳‬‬ ‫خالص آمدنی بعد منہاءی مال گزاری ٹیکس۔‬ ‫‪۴‬‬ ‫‪ ۵‬الف رقم جو ادس کی اولد یا خاندان کیلءےیا کی نجی کام کیلءے‬ ‫ازروءے وقف نامہ واجب الداہو ۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔‬ ‫ب رقم جو ازروےوقف نامہ براءے کار خیر واجب الدا ہو ۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔‬ ‫کسی قسم کا قرضہ یا باریااداءیگی جو ذمہ جاءد موقوفہ شروع سال‬ ‫‪۶‬‬ ‫ل بار کرایہ مالگزاری ابواب ٹیکس و تنخواہ یا گزارہ یا‬ ‫واجب تھا مث ً‬ ‫ڈگری وغیرہ‬ ‫کسی قسم کا قرضہ یا باریااداءیگی جو ذمہ جاءد موقوفہ آخر سال واجب‬ ‫‪۷‬‬ ‫ل بار کرایہ مالگزاری ابواب ٹیکس و تنخواہ یا گزارہ یا ڈگری‬‫تھا مث ً‬ ‫وغیرہ‬ ‫قرض دیا ہوا روپیہ با بینک میں جمع شدہ جو سال کے شروع میں تھا۔‬ ‫‪۸‬‬ ‫قرض دیا ہوا روپیہ با بینک میں جمع شدہ جو سال کے آخر میں تھا۔‬ ‫‪۹‬‬ ‫پ آن ہ روپی ہ‬ ‫واقعی خرچ اندرون سال‬ ‫واقعی ّآمدنی اندرون سال پ آن ہ روپی ہ‬ ‫‪۴۱‬‬ ‫‪ ۱‬سرکاری مالگذاریو ابواب ‪۳ ۴‬‬ ‫‪۱۰۰ - -‬‬ ‫‪ ۱‬ا وصولی ازبقایا سال‬ ‫ٹیکس‬ ‫گزشتہ بابتہ جاءداد زرعی‬ ‫و سکنی‬ ‫‪ ۲‬مطالبہ وقف بورڈ معہ حوالہ‬ ‫ب وصولی ازبقایا سال‬ ‫نمبر و تاریخ رسید‬ ‫گزشتہ بابتہ ڈگریات‬ ‫‪۴۹‬‬ ‫‪۶ -‬‬ ‫‪----------------‬‬ ‫‪۵۳۱ ۱۰ -‬‬ ‫‪ ۲‬ا لگان‬ ‫‪۱۲‬‬ ‫‪ ۳‬صرف تحصیل وصول و ‪- -‬‬ ‫‪- -‬‬ ‫ب سیر و خود کاشت‬ ‫انتظام جاءداد‬ ‫‪۵۶‬‬ ‫‪- -‬‬ ‫‪ ۴‬صرفہ مرمت ع‬ ‫ج ساءر باغات جنگلت‬ ‫تعمیرجاءداد‬ ‫تالب وغیرہ معہ تفصیل‬ ‫‪ ۵‬اخراجات مقدمات‬ ‫‪------------------- - -‬‬ ‫‪۱۸۰‬‬ ‫‪- -‬‬ ‫‪ ۶‬مسجد‬ ‫‪------------------- - -‬‬ ‫‪2915‬‬ ‫‪ ۷‬مدرسہ‬ ‫‪------------------- - -‬‬ ‫‪ ۸‬نزر دینا زد فاتحہ‬ ‫‪------------------- - -‬‬ ‫‪ ۹‬خیرات و امداد و غرباء و‬ ‫د کرایہ مکانات و دوکانات‬ ‫مساکین‬ ‫و آراضیات سکنی‬ ‫‪ ۱۰‬دیگر امور خیر مطابق‬ ‫ر دیگر آمدنی معہ تفصیل‬ ‫وقف نامہ‬ ‫‪ ۱۱‬تنخواہ متولی اگر ہو‬ ‫‪ ۳‬ا جو روپیہ بینک سے‬ ‫نکالگیا‬ ‫‪۲۴۰‬‬ ‫‪ ۱۲‬رقم جو واقف یا واقف کے ‪- -‬‬ ‫ب جو روپیہ قرض کا‬ ‫خاندان کو ازروے وقف‬ ‫وصول ہوا‬ ‫نامہ دی گءی ہو۔‬ ‫‪ ۱۳‬اخراجات متفرق‬ ‫‪ ۱۴‬جو روپیہ بینک میں جمع‬ ‫کیا گیا۔‬ ‫‪ ۱۵‬جو روپیہ قرض دیا گیا۔‬ ‫‪۵۷۸ ۹ ۴‬‬ ‫میزان اخراجات‬ ‫‪۶۳۱ ۱۰ ۱‬‬ ‫میزان کل‬ ‫‪۵۳ - ۸‬‬ ‫پسماندہ رقم معہ تفصیل‬ ‫تحویل جو شروع سال‬ ‫جہان جمع ہو‬ ‫تھی‬ ‫مطابق نوٹ ‪؎۲‬دکھلءی‬ ‫مطابق نوٹ ‪(؎۲‬‬ ‫جاوے‬ ‫دکھلءی جاوے‬ ‫‪۶۳۱ ۱۰ -‬‬ ‫میزان کل‬ ‫‪۶۳۱ ۱۰ ۱‬‬ ‫میزان کل‬ ‫کل رقم مطالبہ جو واجب الوصول میں سے وصول ہونے سے باقی رہ گءی‬ ‫میں بحلف تصدیق کرتا ہوں کہ مندرجہ بال اندراجات و رسیدات متعلقہ جنکی صحت و اصلیت‬ ‫کی جانچ میں نے کرلی ہے میرے علم و یقین میں صحیح و درست ہیں اور میں نے‬ ‫کوءی بات پوشیدہ نہیں رکھی۔‬ ‫دستخط متولی معہ پورا پتہ‬ ‫جواد حسین بقلم عابد حسین‬ ‫ساکن سہنوان ڈاکخانہ درشن نگر‬ ‫ضلع فیض آباد‬ ‫‪Sunni Central Waqf Board U.P. Lucknow‬‬ ‫‪Statement of income and expenditure from 1st April 1949 to‬‬ ‫‪31st March, 1950 under section 57 U.P. Muslim Waqf Act‬‬ ‫‪1936, included in File no. 26 Masjid Babri‬‬ ‫‪Name of the District: Faizabad‬‬ ‫‪Waqf no. : 26.‬‬ ‫‪Name of the Waqf and Waqif ..Masjid Babri.‬‬ ‫‪Name of Mutawalli- Jawad Husain.‬‬ ‫‪1. (Alif) Outstanding amount of the previous year in respect of‬‬ Waqf property, agricultural and residential plots.
Rs.100/-
(B).......
2. (Alif) Rent in respect of agricultural land of previous year which is yet to be realized Rs. 531/-10-1 (Bay) Income from seer and self cultivation .... (Jeem) Income (Sair orchards, ponds, forests etc) with details.. Rs. 531-1--1 (Dal) Rent from houses and shops and residential plots.. (Rey) other income. ....

3. Malguzari of the Govt. and taxes to be paid Rs.41-3-4

4. Net income after deducting Malguzari and taxes...

5. (Alif) Amount to be paid to the relations of the Waqif, or reserved for some other personal as per waqfnama.... (Bey) Amount which is to be spent on charitable purposes.

6. Any debt or encumbrances outstanding in the beginning of the year, e.g. Rent, Malguzari Abwab, Tax and Salaries or Pension or Degrees etc.

7. Any loans or outstanding debt on the waqf property e.g. rent at the end of the year.(e.g.Rent, Malguzari Abwab, Tax and Salaries or Pension or Degrees etc.

8.Amount given as loan and the amount deposited in the bank, in the beginning of the year.

9. Amount of loan or deposited in the bank at the end of the year.

Total Net Rs. As. Total expenditure during Rs.

Income of Ps.           the year                 As.Ps.
the   Waqf
during the
year
1.(A) 100/- 1. Govt. Malguzari Abwab 41-3-4 Receipt of Tax arrears of 2.Demand of the Board the with reference no. and date 49-6-

previous            of the receipt.
year      in
respect of          3.Expenditure on Tehsil
agricultural        wasool and management of       12/-
land     and        property.
residential 4. Expenditure on repair of plots. waqf property.

5. Expenditure on litigation 56/-

(Bey) 6. Litigation on mosque 180-0 Receipt 7. Madrasa litigation from the 8. Nazro, Niyaj and Fateha degrees of 9. Charity and help to the the poor.

previous 10. Other charities as per year. Waqf Names

2.(Alif) 531- 11. Salary of Mutawalli, if Lagan 10-1 any.

12. Amount paid to the 240/-

(Bey) Seer          Waqif or his family as per
and      self       Waqf nama.
cultivation         13.           Miscellaneous
                    expenditure
(Jeem)              14. Amount deposited in
Sair,               the bank.
orchards,           15. Amount given as loan.
forest,
ponds etc.          Total amount                   578-9-4
(give
details)            Previous balance               53-0-8

(Dal) , Rent        Total expenditure              631-10
of houses,
shops and           Balance     with  details
residential         where it is deposited as
plots.              per note no. 2
                    Grand Total
(Rey) other
income with
details
3.(Alif)
Amount


with
drawan
from     the
bank
(Bey)
Amount of
loan
received.

Grand       631-      Total                       631-10
Total       10-1
Total amount of the demand of the Board which is yet to be realized.

I verify on oath that I have checked the entries and receipts there of which are correct to the best of knowledge and belief and nothing has been concealed. Signature and Address of the Mutawalli.

Sd/- Jawad Husain S/o Noorul Hasan R/0 Sahanwa, Darshan Nagar, district Faizabad."

(K) Exhibit A-56 (Suit-1) (Register 8, page 505) is a copy of another Auditor's report for 1948-49 signed by the Auditor on 23.2.1950.

(L) Exhibit A-58 (Suit-1) (Register 8, page 509) is a copy of another Auditor's report for 1948-49 signed by the Auditor on 23.12.1950. The observations of the Auditor read as under:

"REPORT OF AUDITOR FOR 1949-50 included in Waqf File no. 26 of Babri Masjid, Distt. Faizabad
1. No.of Waqf 26. (b) Name of Waqf or Waqif Masjid Babri Faizabad
2. Name of Mutavalli and his address . Jamad Hussain Sahab village Shahnawan P.O. Darshan Nagar ,Distt Faizabad.
3.Gross Annual income which should have been realized during the year 1949-50 Rs.531/10/1
4. Land Revenue and taxes which should have been paid during the year Rs.41/3/4
5. Net income for the year Rs.490/6/9
6. Amount applied for the benefit of the waqif or his descendants or family or any other private purpose under the terms of the deed of waqf. Rs. X
7. Contribution to the board u/s 54 :Rs. 24/8/3
8.Arrears on the opening date of the year :Rs.100/-/-
9. Amount actually realized by the Muttwali during the year 1949-50 Rs.631/10/1
10. Unrealized amount on the closing date: Rs..x (col. No. 3+8-9)
11.A. Balance in he hands of the Mutwalli at the close of year Rs.53/-/8 Total Rs.53/-/8 B. Balance with the Bank at the close of the year: Rs.x Name of Bank .....x...
12. The amount of liabilities on waqf at the close of the year Rs......
13. A. Certified that the entries as above have been reported by me on the basis of the original or certified copies of documents and records by the Mutwalli.
B. Certified that the expenditure of Rs.....x......as detailed overleaf incurred by the mutwalli is illegal and improper or due to failure to recover money or other property or loss or waste of money or other property caused by the neglect or misconduct of the Mutwalli (section 41 of Muslim Waqf Act, 1936). C. Certified that the list of waqf property appended to the statement of accounts submitted by the mutwalli is verified by me from records produced by the mutawalli.
(Sd) M. Husain 23.12.50 Signature of Auditor
14. Main defects of the administration of the waqf with suggestion, if any:-
.....Please see overleaf..................
(Sd) M. Husain (Please fill in the form with care and add a page if necessary) Waqf No. 26 ‫( مسجد بابری‬Masjid Babri) Faizabad.
"Mutwalli's nephew Hamid Husain presented the accounts, as Mutwalli was not feeling well.
(i) As regards the property of this Waqf it consists of ‫( موقوت زمیندار واقعہ بہرن پور شعلہ پییوری ضییلع فیییض آبییاد‬Maukoof Zamindar, r/o Bahoranpur, Sholapuri, District Faizabad) according to a Royal grant by Shahehnshah Babar.
(ii) The income of this Waqf is Rs. 531/10/1, in proof of his income the Mutwalli sent his ‫( کھتتونی‬Khatauni) which was not a certified copy. He should be asked to keep a certified copy of ‫( کھتونی‬Khatauni).
1. As regards the expenditure no receipts were genuine except the receipt of land revenue and the Waqf contribution. They have shown an amount of Rs. 240/- for ‫ ( خاندان وقف‬Family of Waqf) In proof of this amount they show no paper to me therefore I assess this amount ‫( خاندان وقف‬Khandan Waqf) also therefore they should be asked that how they take this amount.

(iv) In Dec. 1949 the mosque has been taken by the Govt. due to disturbances therefore they (Mutwalli Javad Hussain) should be asked to keep this amount in Bank, because there is no expenditure on the mosque at present.

(v) The ‫( متییولی‬Mutwalli) should be given instructions that he should keep his accounts properly and at present there is no need of expenditure therefore from Dec. 1949 all the income should be deposited in Bank. At present a case is going on and the expenditure is met by contribution. In my opinion the income of the property should be deposited in Bank through office." 3097. These documents said to have been submitted by the so called Mutawalli Javvad Hussain or Syed Mohd. Zaki. Except of the Exhibit A72, A31 and A33 all other documents claimed to be submitted with the Sunni Board and true copies received therefrom have been filed. These documents cannot be termed to be "public documents" under Section 74 of the Evidence Act. Nobody has proved the truth of the contents of the said documents. One of the document which is said to be duly audited, i.e., Exhibit A58, for our benefit, the auditor's comments are also on record and it says, "as regards the expenditure no receipts were genuine."

3098. So far as the Exhibits A72, A31, A32 and A33 are concerned, the same contains the details of the income earned from Mauja Bahoranpur and Sholapur. The purpose for which these documents are sought to be relied, therefore, remain untouched qua the property in dispute.

3099. In the third category i.e. documents relating to repair of damaged building in 1934 riot, comes:

(A) Exhibit A-49 (Suit-1) (Register Vol. 8, page 477) is a copy of order dated 12th May 1934 showing that Muslims were permitted to start the work of cleaning and repairs of the disputed building from 14th May 1934 onwards. It reads as under:
"The Mohammadans have been permitted to start the work of cleaning of the Babri mosque from Monday 14th May. I have also asked them to get estimates needed for the repair of the mosque. For the purpose their contracting I would be allowed access to the mosque when necessary.
Once the mosque is cleaned up, it will be possible to use it for religious services. This can be allowed but processions & demonstrations should not be allowed.
The guard should be returned on it.
S.P. to be informed."
(B) Exhibit A-43 (Suit-1) (Register 8, page 459) is a copy of order dated 6th October 1934 passed by Deputy Commissioner/District Magistrate Faizabad for payment of compensation. It reads as under:

"These amounts for payment of compensation are approved subject to any orders that may be passed on objections."
(C) Exhibit A-51 (Suit-1) (Register Vol. 8, page 483) is claimed to be an application dated 25.2.1935 submitted by the contractor concerned complaining about non-payment of his claim despite repair work having been performed. This also reads as under:

‫غریب پرورسلمت جناب عال ٰی‬ ‫گذارش ہے کہ تابیدار کو بابری مسجد کا ٹھیکہ دیا گیا تھا اسییکا کییام عرص یہ‬ ‫ہوا تیار کر دیا اسمیں کچھ سو دو سو روپیہ کا کییام بییاقی رہ گیییا ہتے بغیییر‬ ‫‪2923‬‬ ‫رپیہ کے تابیدار کوبہت سخت تکلیف ہے یہ جو سو دو سییو رپییہ کییا کییام بییاقی‬ ‫ہے اسکو مکمل کرنے سے مجبور ہے اور کوی دوسرا کاروبار بھتی بغیییر‬ ‫روپیہ کے نہیں چلتا جییس سیے کیہ اپنییی ونیییز بچییوں کییی تکلیییف دور کرییں۔‬ ‫اسکےعلوہ جسوقت کام کرنے کے لے حکم دیا گیا تھا اسوقت ساتھ ہی ی یہ‬ ‫حکم ہوا تھا جیسے جیسیے روپییہ وصییول ہوگییا ویسیے ہی روپییہ تمکییو دیییا‬ ‫جاوےگا معلوم ہوا کیہ وصییولیابی عرصیہ سیے ہورہی ہے اور کییافی روپییہ‬ ‫وصییول ہوچکییا عرصیہ ہوا زبییانی حضییور سیے تکلیییف بیییان کیییا ت ھا اس‬ ‫درمیان تابیدار کی طبعت اچھی نہیں تھی اسوجہ سیے حضیور سیے دوبیارہ‬ ‫اپنی مصیییبت بیییان نیہ کییر سیکا۔ دوییم مکانییات جییوکی بییوجہ بلییوہ کیے جییل‬ ‫گےتھے جسکو تعمیر کرنے کے لے تابیدار کو حکم دیا گیا تھا جسییمیں س یے‬ ‫‪ ۱۳‬مکان کی کھپںیل وغیرہ قبل بارش کے درست کییر دیییا۔ کچ یھ دروازہ‬ ‫وغیرہ کا کام باقی رہ گیا ہے جسمیں ک یہ کچ یھ درختییان اور ج ھاڑ وغیییرہ‬ ‫بحکم جناب ڈپٹی کمشنر صاحب فیییض آبییاد ذریعیہ نییزول نییاءب تحصییلدار‬ ‫صاحب بہادر فیض آباد کے تابعدارکو عطا ہوا تھا اور یہ کہا گیا تھا کہ جب‬ ‫تمکو روپیہ ملے گا اسوقت تمھارے بل سے اسییکی قیمییت لیییا جاو ٔیگییا علوہ‬ ‫جو مکان نامکمل ابھی پڑے ہیں اسکے مطابق بھی سامان اکٹھا کییر رک ھا‬ ‫ہے مگر بدرجہ مجبوری روپیہ نیہ ہتونے کیے وجیہ سیے بیٹھتہ رہتا۔ لہتذا ذریعیہ‬ ‫درخواست ہاذا گییذاران کییر امیییدوار ہوں کیہ تابعییدار کییی اس مصیییبت پییر‬ ‫حضور خیال کر کے روپیہ دینے کا حکم صادر فرماویں گے۔‬ ‫واجب جانکر عرض کیا آ ٔندہ مالک حضور‬ ‫تفصیل جو مکانات بناے گے ہیں مسمات)‪ (۱‬مقصودًا )‪(۲‬حبیب اللہ )‪(۳‬‬ ‫حاجی نور محمد )‪ (۴‬خیرات حسین محلہ مگل پورا )‪ (۵‬شہادت علی )‪(۶‬‬ ‫رحمت علی محلہ بیگم پورا )‪ (۷‬عابد علی )‪ (۸‬امین اللہ )‪ (۹‬افضال اللہ )‬ ‫‪ (۱۰‬محمد کریم محلہ سوٹ ہٹی )‪ (۱۱‬مول بخش )‪ (۱۲‬محمد بخش محلہ‬ ‫قاضیانہ )‪ (۱۳‬ظہور علی ۔‬ ‫عرضی فدوی تہور خاں ٹھکیدار ساکن لل باغ فیض آباد‬ ‫۔ ‪۲۵‬فروری سن ‪۳۵‬ء‬ ‫]‪^^xjhc ijoj lyker] tukc vkyh‬‬ ‫‪xqtkfj'k gS fd rkcsnkj dks ckcjh efLtn dk Bsdk fn;k x;k Fkk‬‬ ‫‪bldk dke vjlk gqvk rS;kj dj fn;k blesa dqy lkS nks lkS #i;s dk‬‬ dke ckdh jg x;k gS vkSj #i;s ds rkcsnkj dks cgqr gh l[r rdyhQ gS fd ;g tks lkS nks lkS #i;s dk dke ckdh gS bldks eqdEey djus ls etcwj gS vkSj dksbZ nwljk dkjksckj Hkh cxSj #i;s ds ugha pyrk ftlls dHkh viuh o uht cPpksa dh rdyhQ nwj djsa blds vykok ftl oDr dke djus ds fy;s gqDe fn;k x;k Fkk ml oDr lkFk gh ;g gqDe gqvk Fkk fd tSls tSls #i;k olwy gksxk oSls gh #i;k gedks fn;k tkosxk ekywe gqvk fd olwy;kch vjls ls gks jgh gS vkSj dkQh #i;k olwy gks pqdk vjlk gqvk tckuh gqtwj ls rdyhQ c;ku fd;k Fkk bl njfe;ku rkcsnkj dh rfc;r vPNh ugha Fkh bl otg ls gqtwj ls nksckjk viuh eq'khcr c;ku ugha dj ldkA nks;e edkukr tks fd cotg cyos ds ty x;s Fks ftldks rkehj djus ds fy;s rkcsnkj dks gqDe fn;k x;k Fkk ftlesa ls 13 edku dh [kijSy oxSjg dOy okfjl ds nq#Lr dj fn;k dqN njokts oxSjg dk dke ckdh jg x;k gS ftlesa dqN nj[rku vkSj >kM+ oxSjg cgqdqe tukc fMIVh dfe'uj lkgc cgknqj QStkckn ds tfj;s utwy uk;c rglhynkj lkgc cgknqj QStkckn ds rkcsnkj dks vrk gqvk Fkk vkSj ;g dgk x;k Fkk fd tc rqedks #i;k feysxk ml oDr rqEgkjs fcy ls mldk dher fn;k tkosxk vykok tks edku ukeeqdEey vHkh i<+s gSa mlds eqrkfyd Hkh lkeku bdV~Bk dj j[kk gS exj c otg etcwjh #i;ku gksus dh otg ls cSb jgk fygktk tfj;s nj[okLr gktk xqejku dj mEehnokj gwWa fd rkcsnkj dh bl eq'khcr ij gqtwj [k;ky dj ds #i;k nsus dk gqDe lkfnj Qjek;sxsa okftc tku dj vtZ fd;k vkgUnk ekfyd gqtwjA rQlhy tks edkukr cuk;s x;s gSa eqlEekr edlwnu] gchcqYyk ¼2½ 3- gkth uwj eqgEen 4- [ksjkr gqlsu eqgYyk eqxyiqjk 5- lgknr vyh 6- jger vyh eqgYyk csxe iqjk 7- vkfcn vyh 8- vehu mYyk 9- vQtky mYyk 10- eqgEen djhe eqgYyk lkSVgVh 11- ekSyk cDl 12- eqgEen c['k eqgYyk dft;kuk 13- tgwj fe;kaA vthZ fQnoh rgOoj [kka Bsdsnkj lkfdu ykyckx QStkckn nLr[kr rgOoj [kkWa 25-2-35^^ Most Respected Sir, I beg to say that I was granted contract of Babri Masjid. The work has already been completed about a year before, barring certain small piece of work for a value of Rs. 100/- or 200/-. The applicant is in dire need of money and only little work to the extent of Rs. 200/- is remaining, which I cannot carry out. The applicant has no other business. Kindly provide relief to me and my family. Besides, at the time of contract, it was agreed upon that part payments will be made according to Vasoolyabi. I have come to know that the enough revenue has been collected. I have already told orally to you that I was in trouble and needed money. During this time the applicant was not feeling well, so, he could not convey his grievance again. Secondly, the applicant was required to construct the houses which were burnt during the riot, out of which 13 houses of Khaprail have been repaired before the rains commenced. A small piece of work in relation to doors etc is remaining. Further under the orders of the Deputy Commissioner Faizabad through Tehsildar (Nuzul) Faizabad, certain trees and shrubs were allotted to the applicant with the assurance that whenever the applicant gets money the price of the aforesaid would be deducted from the bill. The applicant has already collected material for repairs of the remaining houses. But due to paucity of of required money the applicant remained idle. So, I would request you to kindly consider my grief sympathetically and provide money to me and for this purpose. kindly issue necessary orders. Deemed necessary, so prayed.
Malik Hujoor.
Details of the houses constructed : (1) Mst. Maqsudan, (2) Habibullah, (3) Haji Noor Mohammad (4) Khairat Hussain, Mohalla Mughalpura, (5) Sahadat Ali 6. Rahmat Ali, Mohalla Begumpura (7) Abid Ali (8) Aminullah (9) Afzalullah (10) Mohd. Karim Mohalla Sothati (11) Maula Bux (12) Mohd. Bux Mohalla Kaziana (13) Zahoor Miyan.
Applicant Tahavvar Khan Contractor, r/o Lal Bagh Faizabad 25.2.35."
(D) Exhibit A-45 (Suit-1) (Register 8, page 467) is the copy of the order dated 26th February 1935 of the Deputy Commissioner Faizabad for payment of Rs. 7000/- to the contractor for the work he had discharged at the disputed mosque.

(E) Exhibit A-44 (Suit-1) (Register 8, page 461-465) is copy of the estimate submitted by Zahoor Khan, contractor, Lal Bagh Faizabad on 15th April 1935 for repairs of the building in dispute.

(F) Exhibit A-48 (Suit-1) (Register 8, page 473-476) is a copy of inspection report dated 21st November 1935 of Sri Zorawar Sharma, Assistant Engineer Faizabad verifying the work performed by contractor and recommending for payment as claimed by him but after making some alternation therein.

(G) Exhibit A-46 (Suit-1) (Register Vol. 8, page 469) is a copy of report of Mubarak Ali, Bill Clerk dated 27th January 1936 which reads as under:

"The bill of the contractor regarding the construction of the mosque is herewith put up as ordered. As regards the bill for the burnt houses, the estimates of which have been lost, has recently been sent to the Nazul Naib Tahsildar under the orders of D.C. for checking the work done by the ‫‪2927‬‬ ‫"‪contractor on the spot.‬‬ ‫‪(H) Exhibit A-47 (Suit-1) (Register 8, page 471) is a copy‬‬ ‫‪of report dated 29th January 1936 of checking/verification‬‬ ‫‪submitted by A.D. Dixon which reads as under:‬‬ ‫‪"The repairs to the Babri mosque has been checked by‬‬ ‫‪the P.W.D. The payment for this work, amounting to Rs.‬‬ ‫"‪6825/12/-, should, I think, be paid now.‬‬ ‫)‪(I‬‬ ‫‪Exhibit A-52 (Suit-1) (Register Vol. 8, page 489) is‬‬ ‫‪another copy of the complaint made by Tahavvar Khan,‬‬ ‫‪contractor on 30th April 1936 complaining about certain‬‬ ‫‪claims disallowed by the PWD authorities and reads as‬‬ ‫‪under:‬‬ ‫غریب پرور سلمت‬ ‫گزارش ہے کہ سایل کا بل بابت مرمت مکانات واقییع اجودھیییا مبلغ ‪۳۶۰۴‬‬ ‫روپیہ ‪ ۹‬آنا کا تھا جسمیں سےسییایل کییو صییرف ‪ 3287‬روپییہ ‪ ۱‬آنییا ‪ ۶‬پییای‬ ‫دیاگییا ہے کمیی کیی وجیہ ییہ معلیوم ہوتی ہےجیانب نیزول نیایب تحصییلدار‬ ‫صاحب فیض آباد نے دوران جانچ کیام مرمیت ییہ تجیویزکر دییا کیہ دو‪،‬تیین‬ ‫دوروازے کی موٹاءی ڈیڑہ انچ ‪،‬دروازوں کی قیمت مالیتی ‪ ۲۳‬روپیہ ‪۱۲‬‬ ‫آنییا‪ ۱۶ ،‬روپییہ ‪ ۱۱‬آنیہ ‪ ۳‬پییای کیے مبلییغ ‪ ۱۱ ،۱۶‬روپییہ کییر دی جییاے اور‬ ‫کھڑکیوں کی قیمت بجاے مبلغ ‪ ۷‬روپیہ کےمبلغ ‪ ۴‬روپیہ کر دی جییاے ۔عییالی‬ ‫جاہ بوقت جانچ اسٹیمٹنٹ ‪ ۳‬دروازوں کی مو ٹای ڈی یڑہ انییچ اور کہڑکیییوں‬ ‫کی قیمت کم کرکے مجھ کیو پیی ڈبلیو ڈی نیے ‪ ۲۳‬روپییہ ‪ ۱۲‬آنیہ ‪ ۱۶‬روپییہ‬ ‫‪ ۱۱‬آنہ ‪ ۳‬پاءی ‪ ۷‬روپیہ منظییور کییی ت ھی اور اسییی کیے مطییابق سییایل نیے‬ ‫دروازے اور کھڑکیاں سالوں پہلیے لگییا یییا ت ھا اور جانییچ کیے وقییت آفیسییر‬ ‫انچارج جانچ کنندہ کو وہ نءی حالت میں نہیی ملی۔ غالبًا اسی وجہ سے یییہ‬ ‫کمی تجویز کی گی ہے۔ حالنکہ نےدروازہ اور کھڑکیییاں تجییویز شییدہ رقییم‬ ‫میں ہر گز تیار نہیں ہو سکتی ہیں۔ وجوہات بال ساءل امیدوار ہے کیہ ‪ ۳‬ڈور‬ ‫دروازہ سوا انچ اور کھڑکیوں کے ریٹ کی جانچ پی ڈبلو ڈی سے دوبییارہ‬ ‫کرالی جاے اور ساءل کا بقیہ روپیہ مرہمت فرمایا جییاے۔ سییایل کییا بییل بییابت‬ ‫مسجد بابری ‪ ۷۲۲۹‬روپیہ کا تھا جسمیں سے ساءل کو ‪ ۶۸۲۵‬روپییہ ‪ ۱۲‬آنیہ‬ ‫ آنا کم برامیید کیییا گیییا ۔ حییالنکہ اس یٹیمیٹ جییو‬۴ ‫ روپیہ‬۴۰۳ ‫دیا گیا ہے یعنی‬ ‫ روپیہ کا تھا اور سایل نے اسٹیمیٹ سے کم بل دیا‬۷۳۲۹ ‫منظور ہوا تھا وہ‬ ‫تھا لہذا ساءل کو سمجھایا جاے کہ کون کون سی رقم ساءل کی نہیں برامیید‬ ‫کی گی جس میں حضور سے سایل اس کے متعلق عرض کر سکے ۔‬ ‫ء‬۳۶ ‫ اپریل‬۳۰ ‫فدوی تہور خاں ٹھیکیدار مورخہ‬ ^^xjhc ijoj lyker] xqtkfj'k gS fd lk;y dk fcy ckcr ejEer edkukr okds v;ks/;k eqcfyx 3604 #i;k 9 vkuk dk Fkk ftlesa ls lk;y dks flQZ 3287 #i;k 1 vkuk 6 ikbZ fn;k x;k gSA deh dh otg ;g ekywe gksrh gS fd tukc utwy uk;c rglhynkj lkgc QStkckn us nkSjku [kkfrj dke ejEer ;g rtcht dj fn;k fd nks rhu njokts dh eksVkbZ Ms<+ bap njoktksa dh dher ekfy;rh 23 #i;k 12 vkuk] 16 #i;k 11 vkuk 3 ikbZ ds eqcfyx 16 #i;k] 11 #i;k dj nh tk; vkSj f[kM+fd;ksa dh dher ctk; eqcfyx 7 #i;s ds eqcfyx 4 #i;s dj nh tk; vkyhtgk cjoDr tkap LVsVesaV 3 njoktksa dh eksVkbZ Ms<+ bap vkSj f[kM+fd;ksa dh dher de dj ds eq>dks ih0MCyw0Mh0 us 23 #i;k 12 vkuk] 16 #i;k 11 vkuk 3 ikbZ] 7 #i;k eUtwj dh Fkh vkSj blh ds eqrkfYyd lk;y us njoktk o f[kM+fdka lkyks igys yxk;k Fkk vkSj tkap dsoy vkfQlj bapktZ dqfUunk dks og ubZ gkyr esa ugh feyh xkycu bl otg ls ;g deh rtoht dh xbZ gS gkykafd u;s njoktk o f[kM+fd;ka rtcht 'kqnk jde esa gjfxt rS;kj ugha gks ldrhaA cotwgkr ckyk lk;y mEehnokj gS fd 3 Mksj njokts lok bap o f[kM+fd;ksa ds jsV dh tkap ih0MCyw0 Mh0 ls nksckjk djk yh tk; vkSj lk;y dks cfd;k #i;k ejger Qjek;k tkos lk;y dk fcy ckor elftn ckcjh 7229 #0 dk Fkk ftlesa ls lk;y dks 6825 #0 12 vk0 fn;k x;k gSA ;kuh 403 #0 4 vk0 de cjken fd;k x;k gkayk fd LVhesV tks eUtwj gqvk Fkk og 7329 #0 dk Fkk vkSj lk;y us LVhesV ls de fcy fn;k x;k fygktk lk;y dks le>k;k tkos fd dkSu dkSu lh jdesa lk;y dh ugha cjken dh xbZ ftlesa gqtwj ls lk;y blds eqrkfYyd vtZ dj ldsA fQnoh rgOoj [kka Bsdsnkj rk0 30 vizSy lu~ 36^^ " Gharib Parwar Salamat. I beg to state that my bill for the repair work of the houses was to the tune of Rs. 3604/- out of which the applicant has been paid 3287/1/6 only the reason for the officer under payment seems to be that the officer Nazul and Naib Tahsildar Faizabad at the time of inspection during repairs, proposed that the thickness of the two doors of 1-1/2 inch, valued at Rs 23/12 and Rs 16/11/3 be reduced to Rs 16/- and Rs 11/- respectively, the price of the windows was reduced to Rs. 4/ instead of Rs 7/. Sir, at the time of inspection of the after reducing the thickness of the three doors to 1-1/2 inches and that of windows the P.W.D. after revision of the price, approved Rs 23/12/-, Rs 16/11/3 and Rs 7/- respectively, and accordingly fixed the doors and windows years back. At the time of inspection of the officer incharge, those were found not in new condition, that is why deduction was proposed although the new doors and windows could certainly not be prepared at the proposed price. Therefore it is requested that inspection and revaluation of 3 doors- 1-1/4 inches and rates of the windows may be made by the P.W.D. and the applicant may kindly be paid his remaining amount. Applicant's bill in respect of Masjid Babri was of Rs. 7229/- out of which he has been paid Rs, 6825/12/- i.e. short by Rs 403/41- though the estimate was approved for Rs. 7329/- and the applicant has been paid lesser amount. Therefore the applicant may kindly be furnished details as to which amount has been deducted so that the applicant may move your honour. Applicant: Tahauwar Khan the Thekedar dated April 30, 1936."
(J) Exhibit A-50 (Suit-1) (Register Vol. 8, page 479) is a letter of Tahawar Khan Thekedar regarding repair work in the disputed structure and reads as under:

‫ء مشمولہ مثل‬۱۹۳۵ ‫ اپریل‬۱۶ ‫نقل درخواست تہور خاں ٹھیکہدارمورخہ‬ ‫ فیض آباد‬،‫بابری مسجد اجودھیا‬ ‫بحضور جناب حاکم تحصیل صاحب بہادر فیض آباد دام اقبالہ‬ ‫غریب پردرسلمت جناب عالی‬ ‫گزارش ہے بابری مسجد کے بل دینے میں دیری ابھی سے ہو ٔی کہ کلسہ‬ ‫ڈرم کا بنارس میں تیار ہو رہا ہے ابھی تک آیا نہیں مگر اب بل بحکم‬ ‫حضور فورًا داخل کر رہا ہوں پتھرسنگ مرمر بھی جسمیں الّلہ لکھا‬ ‫جاویگا مکمل نہیں کیا یہ دونوں کام جو کہ اندر ایک ہفتہ میں ہو جاو ٔیگا‬ ‫مکانات کے بل کچھ اس ہفتہ کے اندر داخل کر دونگا جو کچھ کام باقی‬ ‫تھا وہ ہورہا ہے واجبًا عرض ہے۔‬ ‫ فیض آباد‬،‫ ساکن لل باغ‬،‫فدوی تہور خاں ٹھیکہدار‬ ۳۵‫۔‬۴‫۔‬۱۶ ‫تہور خاں‬ ^^udy nj[okLr rgOoj [kkWa Bsdsnkj eksj[kk 16 vizSy] lu~ 1935 bZ0 e'kewyk fely ckcjh efLtn v;ks/;k] QStkckn cgwtwj tukc gkfde rglhy lkgc cgknqj QStkckn nkes,dckygw xjhc ijoj lyker tukcs vkyh xqtkfj'k gS fd ckcjh efLtn ds fcy nsus esa nsj bl otg ls gqbZ gS fd dylk Mze dk cukjl esa rS;kj gks jgk gSA vHkh rd vk;k ugha exj vc fcy cgqdqe gwtwj QkSju nkf[ky dj jgk gwWaA iRFkj laxejej Hkh ftlesa vYyk fy[kk tk;sxk eqdEey ugha fd;k ;g nksuksa dke tks fd vUnj ,d gQ~rs esa gks tk;sxk edkukr ds fcy dqN bl gQ~rs ds vUnj nkf[ky dj nwaxkA tks dqN dke ckdh Fkk gks jgk gSA okftcu vtZ gSA vthZ fQnoh rgOoj [kka Bsdsnkj lkfdu ykyckx] QStkckn g0 rgOoj [kka 16-4-35^^ "Copy of the application of Tahawar Khan Thekedar dated 16.4.1935 included in the file of Babri Masjid, Ayodhya, Faizabad.
To the Tehsildar Saheb Bahadur, Faizabad ‫‪2931‬‬ ‫‪Gharib Parwar Salamat.‬‬ ‫‪I beg to say that delay in submitting the bill for Babri‬‬ ‫‪Masjid occurred because Kalsa (pitcher) of the Dome is‬‬ ‫‪being prepared in Banaras and has not yet been‬‬ ‫‪received. But under your orders I am submitting the same‬‬ ‫‪now. The piece of marble stone on which "Allah" will be‬‬ ‫‪engraved, has not yet been got ready. I hope both the said‬‬ ‫‪jobs would be done within a week. The bills in respect of‬‬ ‫‪houses will be submitted within this week. The remaining‬‬ ‫‪work is in progress. Yours sincerely, Tahauwar Khan‬‬ ‫)‪Thekedar resident of Faizabad 16-04-35." (ETC‬‬ ‫‪(K) Exhibit A-53 (Suit-1) (Register Vol. 8, page 493) is a‬‬ ‫‪copy of the application dated 2.1.1936 of Tahavvar Khan,‬‬ ‫‪Contractor for early payment of his dues and reads as‬‬ ‫‪under:‬‬ ‫حضور جناب کے محسن صاحب صدر فیض آباد‬ ‫غریب پرور سلمت‬ ‫جناب عالی گزارش ہے کیہ مکانییات جییوکی اجودھیییا بلییوہ مییں جییل گءے‬ ‫تھے جسکو تابیدار کو مکمل کے ہوےکافی عرصہ ہوا اور تابیدار کییو اب ھی‬ ‫تک روپیہ نہیں مل اور دریافت سیے معلییوم ہوا کیہ اسیٹمٹ مکانییات غییایب‬ ‫ہوگیا اسوجہ سے جناب انجینیر صاحب پی۔ ڈبلو۔ڈی۔ بیابری مسییجد کییا بیل‬ ‫چیک کر کے دوبارہ مثل کو واپس کر دیا مکانات کا بییل بغیییر اسیٹمٹ کیے‬ ‫رہ گیا۔ عالیجاہ اس اسیٹمٹ کییو جنییاب نییایب تحصیییل دارنییزول رییٹ پییی۔‬ ‫ڈبلو۔ڈی۔ سے چیک کراکے دوبارہ تابیدرارس یے اس یٹمٹ لیاگیاجسییکی اردو‬ ‫کاپی میرے پاس موجود ہے اگر حکم ہو تابیداراسکی کاپی پیییش کییر سییکتا‬ ‫ہےمہربانی کر کے میرے مکانوں کا بل جناب انجینیر صاحب کے پاس روانہ‬ ‫کر دیا جاے تاکہ بل چیک ہو جاوے تابیدار کو مییل جییاوے کیییونکہ روپییہ کییی‬ ‫سخت ضورت ہے۔‬ ‫واجبًا عرض ہے۔‬ ‫عرضی‬ ‫فدوی تہور خان ٹھکیدار ساکن لل باغ فیض آباد‬ ۲‫۔‬۱‫۔‬۳۶‫۔‬ ^^xjhc ijoj lyker tukcs vkyh xqtkfj'k gS fd edkukr v;ks/;k tks fd cyos esa ty x;s FksA ftldks rkcsnkj dks eqdEey fd;s gq;s cgqr vjlk gqvk vkSj rkcsnkj dks #i;k vHkh rd ugha feyk vkSj nj;kQ~r ls ekywe gqvk fd LVhesV edkukr dk xk;c gks x;k bl otg ls tukc bUthfu;j ih0MCyw0Mh0 ckcjh efLtn dk fcy psd djds feLy dks okil dj fn;kA edkukr dk fcy cxSj LVhesV ds jg x;k vkyh tkg bl LVhesV dks tukc uk;c rglhynkj lkgsc utwy jsV ih0MCyw0Mh0 ls psd djkds nksckjk rkcsnkj ls LVhesV fy;k x;kA ftldh mnwZ dkih esjs ikl ekStwn gS vxj gqdqe gks rkcsnkj bldks ;k bldh dkih is'k dj ldrk gS esgjckuh djds esjk edkuksa dk fcy tukc bathfu;j lkgsc ds ikl jokuk dj fn;k tkos rkfd fcy psd gks tk;s rkcsnkj dks #i;k fey tk, D;ksafd #i;s dh l[r t:jr gS okftcu vtZ gSA vthZ fQnoh rgOoj [kka Bsdsnkj lkfdu ykyckx QStkcknA 2-1-36 g0 rgOoj [kkaA "Garib Parvar Salamat, Janabe Ali, Respectfully it is submitted that certain houses in Ayodhya were burnt in the riots, which were constructed by the contractor long back but the contractor could not get the money so far. The query in this behalf revealed that estimate concerning those houses had been lost somewhere and due to which the Engineer of PWD after perusing the bill returned the file. The payment of bill could not be made in absence of estimate. Respected Tehsildar Saheb, Estimate of Nazul rate was obtained from the contractor again, Urdu copy whereof is available with the applicant. If ordered, the applicant can produce the same or copy of the said, My bills in respect of houses may very kindly be sent to Engineer Saheb so that the bills may be checked and contractor may get money because he is in dire need of money.

Applicant Tahavvar Khan, Contractor, R/o Lal Bagh 2.1.36."

3100. All these documents pertaining to repairing etc. of the building in dispute pursuant to its damage in 1934 riot and show that there was a substantial damage to building including its domes, stones inscriptions etc., which were repaired by Muslim contractors. However, no order has been placed before us to show that as a matter of fact, premises in dispute was ever handed over to Muslims or they were allowed to offer Namaz in the building in dispute. At least their documents do not help the Muslim parties so far as this aspect of the matter is concerned. 3101. In the fourth category, i.e. orders under Section 92 C.P.C., comes:

(A) Exhibit A-29 (Suit-1) (Register 7, page 331)=Exhibit 28 (Suit-5) (Register 23, page 667) is a copy of the order dated 18.12.1929 of Legal Remembrancer of Government of U.P. communicating sanction for institution of a suit under Section 92 C.P.C. The subject matter is mentioned as under:
"The mosque built by Emperor Babar and known as Babar's mosque in village Ramkot, Ajodhya city, and the proceeds and profits of village Bahuranpur and of about 12 Bighas of village Sholapur pergana Haveli, set apart for the upkeep of the said mosque."
It is addressed to the following:

"1. Hafiz Mumtaz Hosain, son of S.Tafazzul Hasain, resident of Bazar Salarganj
2. Haji Agha Mirza, son of Mirza Azam Beg, resident of Mohalla Sabzimandi,
3.Haji Mohammed Yasin, son of S.Mohammed Hafeez resident of Mohalla Rakabganj, Fyzabad.
4. Hakim Abdul Wahab son of Dr. Khuda Bux, resident of Singarhat.
5. Zahoor Ahmad, son of Noor Mohammad, resident of Mohalla Naugazi and
6. Mohammad Shafi, son of Ghorey, Mohalla Sotahti, Ajodhya."
(B) Exhibit A-68 (Suit-1) (Register 8, page 559) is a copy of the order dated 19.01.1929 passed by Deputy Commissioner Faizabad directing the applicant to file application seeking sanction for filing a suit u/s 92 C.P.C. in respect of Bahoranpur Sahnawa.

(C) Exhibit 27 (Suit-5) (Register 23, Page 665)(the document appear to be incomplete. Neither the date of the order is legible nor to whom it was addressed is mentioned therein and therefore cannot be relied on. However, it is claimed to be is a copy of the Government order according sanction under Section 92 C.P.C. for institution of a suit. The subject matter is mention as under:

"The mosque built by Emperor Babar and known as Babar's mosque in village Ramkot, Ajodhia city, and the proceeds and profits of village Bahuranpur and of about 12 bighas of village Sholapur pergana Haveli Oudh, set apart for the upkeep of the said mosque."
3102. These documents on the one hand show that some muslim persons obtained permission from the Government under Section 92 for institution of the suit but it is an admitted fact that no record is available to show that any suit actually filed by anyone. In fact what we find is that sanction was granted under Section 92 CPC but further details as to how and why the said sanction was granted and what thereafter happened is not known to us. Due to lack of attending information we are not in a position to take these documents into consideration for forming opinion either way in the context of the issue in question.

3103. In the fifth category, there is correspondence with Sunni Board with regard to Wakf, its registration etc.:

(A) Exhibit A-67 (Suit-1) (Register 8, page 547-558) is a copy of the reply dated 19/20 July 1938 filed by Mohd.
Zaki to Waqf Commissioner pursuant to notice u/s 4 of U.P. Waqf Act 1936.

‫بعدالت جناب وقف کمشنر صاحب بہادر فیض آباد‬ ‫سیییدمحمد ذکییی ولیید سییید محمیید رضییی سییاکن ش یہنوان برگن یہ حییویلی اودہ‬ ‫تحصیل و ضلع فیض آباد‬ ‫درخواست عذرداری‬ ‫جناب عالی‬ ‫غریب پرور سلمت‬ ۴ ‫بمقدمہ مندرجہ عنوان گذارش ہے کہ سایل کےنام ایک نوٹحس جب دفعہ‬ ‫ء عدالت ہذا سے جاری ہو کر تعمیل ہوا ہے‬۱۹۳۶ ‫قانون مسلم اوقاف‬ ‫چنانچہ اسکے جواب میں سایل کے حسب ذیل عذرات ہیں‬ ‫ ۔ یہکہ ضروری شجرہ خاندان سایل یہاں پر انکشاف واقعات مقدمہ‬۱ ‫دفعہ‬ ‫ہذا درج ذیل ہے اور اشخاص مندرجہ شجرہ مذکور کو پابند مذہب شیعہ اثنا‬ ‫عشری تھے اورہیں۔‬ ‫سید عبدالباقی‬ :

‫سید ۔۔۔۔۔۔ علی‬ :
‫سید حسین علی‬ :
‫مسماۃ سکونت بی بی‬ :
                :                           :                       :
        ‫علی نقی‬                       ‫محمد افضل‬                ‫محمد اصغر‬
            :                             :                    :
                                                                       ‫‪2936‬‬

    ‫ناظم علی‬                      ‫امجد علی‬                     ‫محمد رضی‬



      ‫محمد حسین‬       ‫جواد حسین‬      ‫میرحسین‬       ‫کلب حسین‬       ‫محمد ذکی‬

‫سید حسین اصغر‬     ‫سید غلم اصغر‬       ‫سید ابوا لمحمد‬   ‫نورالحسن‬

‫دفعہ ‪۲‬۔‪ :‬یہ کہ بابربادشاہ دہلی نے ایک قطعہ مسجد واقع جنم استھان شہر‬ ‫اجوھیا تعمیر کرایا ۔ اور اسکو مسجد بابری کے نام سے موسوم کیا اور‬ ‫منصب تو لیت و خطابت مسجد مذکور کو سپرد سید عبدالباقی مورث سایل‬ ‫مندرجہ شجرہ کے کیا۔ اور مبلغ ‪ ۴۰‬روپیہ سالنہ نقد و موازی قدیمہ کہ پختہ‬ ‫ّآراضی بطور پٹہ سید عبدالباقی مذکور کو بطور مد و معاش عطا فرمایا۔‬ ‫جو یکے ب دیگرے اولد مورث مذکور کو ملتا چل آیا‬ ‫دفعہ ‪ ۳ :‬یہکہ زمانہ سلطنت اودہ وعہدہ نواب سعادت علیجان بہادر وزیر‬ ‫اورہ مابین بجاے رقم مذکور کے مبلغ تین سو دو روپیہ تین آنہ چھہ پای‬ ‫بطور نانکارو مد و معاش مورث سایل کو ملنا شروع ہوا اور برابر ملتا‬ ‫رہا۔‬ ‫دفعہ‪ ۴ :‬۔ یہ کہ ابتدا سے زمانہ سلطنت برطانیہ اور المحاق صوبہ اودہ سے سند‬ ‫نا نکار نقد گورنمنٹ سے عطا ہوی اور ‪۱۸۶۴‬ء تک مبلغ ‪ ۳۰۶‬نقد سالنہ‬ ‫خزانہ گورنمنٹ سے برامد ہوکر مورث سایل کو ملتا رہا۔‬ ‫دفعہ‪ ۵:‬یہ کہ بعد ازاںجب تجویذ حکام گورمنٹ موضع بہورن پور و آراضی‬ ‫شعلہ پوری پرگنہ حویلی بانقوش زر نقد۔۔۔۔ مذکور کے محمد اصغرو محمد‬ ‫افضل مورثاں و پیش رواں سایل مندجہ شجرہ کو نانکان معافی عطا کیا‬ ‫گیا جب سے مورثان سایل و سایل بمشمول دیگر سرکار کے چلے آتے ہیں۔‬ ‫دفعہ‪ ۶:‬یہ کہ زمانہ بندوبست پختہ اول میں عدالت بندوبست سے ڈگری حقیت‬ ‫ملکیت اعلی مواصفات مذکور کی بابت بحق محمد اصغر و محمد افضل‬ ‫مذکور بتاریخ ‪ ۳‬فروری ‪ ۱۸۷۰‬صادر ہوءی چنانچہ بعد صدور ڈگری‬ ‫مذکور و ڈگریداران و ورثاءے ڈگریداران مذکور بشمول سایل بحیثیت‬ ‫مالک اعلی قابض و متصرف جاءداد کو چلے آتے ہیں۔‬ ‫دفعہ‪ ۷:‬یہ کہ مورثہ سایل و سایل مسجد بابری مذکور کے تحفظ و قیام کے‬ ‫لءے ضروری اخراجات یہی کرتے رہے ہیں۔‬ ‫دفعہ‪ ۸:‬یہ کہ بلحاظ واقعیات مندرجہ بال علی الخصوص بالحاظ اس عمل کے‬ ‫‪2937‬‬ ‫کہ گورمنٹ برطانیہ نے بعد اسحاق صوبہ اودھ اپنی جانب سے رقم نانکار و‬ ‫مدو معاش مذکور و بعد ازاں مواصحات بشکرہ بال مورث سایل کو عطا‬ ‫فرمایاو نیز بوجہ اس کے کہ بندوبست سابق پختہ سے موزمان و پیش رواں‬ ‫سایل کے حق میں ڈگری ملکیت اعلی کی صادر ہوءی۔ جاءداد مذکور‬ ‫مسلم وقف کی تعریف میں ہرگز نہیں آ سکتی اور جاءداد مذکور کی طرح‬ ‫سے ایکٹ قانون مسلم اوقاف نہیں متصور ہو سکتے۔ خصوصًا یہی وجہ ہے‬ ‫کہ عطیہ جاءداد گورمنٹ برطانیہ یعنی غیر مسلم کا ہے اور مشروط ہے۔‬ ‫دفعہ‪ ۹:‬یہ کہ بہر صورت جاءداد مذکور بموجب دفعہ ‪ ۴‬ایکٹ مسلم قانون‬ ‫‪ ۱۹۳۶‬قانون مذکور کی دفعات کی پابندی سے مستثنی ہے کیوں کہ بہت‬ ‫زیادہ حصہ آمدنی کا بطور مد و معاش سایل شرکاہان سایل مندرجہ ک ی‬ ‫ھٹ‬ ‫کےذاتی مصارف میں صرف ہوتاچل آیا ہے۔‬ ‫دفعہ‪ ۱۰:‬یہ کہ بالحاظ رفع حجت و بالحاظ مطالعت حکم عدالت امور‬ ‫دریافت طلب کا جواب درج فہرست )الف( یہ کہ اگر عدالت سایل کی‬ ‫منظوری کے لءے اظہار واقعات مندرجہ درخواست ہذا کافی نہ متصور ہو‬ ‫تو سایل کو موقع عطا فرمایا جاوے کہ وہ اپنے عذرات کو اپنے وکیل کے‬ ‫ذریعہ سے عدالت مجاز میں بتاریخ معینہ پیش کرے۔‬ ‫فدوی‬ ‫سید محمد ذکی سایل‬ ‫‪۱۹/۱/۱۹۳۸‬‬ ‫‪"Before the Court of the Commissioner Faizabad. Syed‬‬ ‫‪Mohd.Zaki S/o Syed Mohd.Razi R/o Mauza Shahnawan‬‬ ‫‪Pargana Haweli Oudh Tehsil and District Faizabad.‬‬ ‫‪Objection‬‬ ‫‪Gharib Parwar Salamat.‬‬ ‫‪In the matter of the above subject, it is submitted that‬‬ ‫‪a notice under Section 4 of the Muslim Waqf Act 1936 has‬‬ ‫‪been issued by the Court and served upon me. Therefore in‬‬ ‫‪reply to the same, the applicant submits the following‬‬ ‫‪objections:‬‬ (1) That the necessary pedigree of the applicant belonging to the Shia Sect case is as under:
Syed Abdul Baqi :
Hajbar Ali :
Syed Hussain Ali :
Mst. Sakunat Bibi :
    :                   :                :
Mohd. Asghar         Mohd. Afzal   Ali Taqi
      :                 :            :
Mohd. Razi         Amzad Ali       Nazim Ali
      :                 :                :
::                :           :            :
Mohd. Zaki Kalbe Hussain :                 :
(Applicant)    (alive)        :            :
                              :            :
:               :                :         :
Munir Husain Javvad Hussain Mohd.Hussain :
:
: : : :
Nurul Hasan Syed Abu Mohd. Syed Ghulam Syed Asghar Hasnain Asghar Section 2. That the King Babar, Delhi, got constructed a Masjid at Janam Sthan, City Ayodhya and named it as Masjid Babri. He nominated Syed Abdul Baqi ancestor of the applicant as indicated in the above pedigree and Rs. 40/- cash annually and gifted 13 Bighas Arazi Pucca on contract which continued to received by his successor generation by generation.
Section 3. That from the era of Saltanant Oudh, Nawab Saadat Ali Khan Bahadur Wazir Oudh instead of the aforesaid grant began to give Rs, Three hundred and two, Annas three and six pie as Nankar which was being regularly received.
Section 4. That from the era of Sultanate Britania after annexation of province of Oudh a certificate of cash grant Nankar of Rs. 302/- 3 Annas and 6 Pie annually was being received by the ancestor of the applicant till 1862 from the Government Treasury.
Section 5: In pursuance of the decision of the Government the property of Arazi Sholapuri and Mauza Bahoranpur was declared Nazul and the same were given as Maafi to Mohd. Asghar and Mohd. Afzal, ancestors of the applicant the Government Mauza Bahoranpur and Arazi Sholapur, Nazul property.
Section 6: That from First Settlement ownership right of the property aforesaid was entered in favour of Mohd. Asghar and Mohd. Afzal, ancestors of the applicant vide order dated 3rd February 1870 passed by the Settlement Officer and the applicant and their ancestors have been in continuous possession over the said property.
Section 7: That the ancestors and the applicant have been incurring required expenditure for the protection and upkeep of the mosque.
Section 8: That in view of the fact that after annexation of Oudh the British Government granted cash Nankar to the ancestors of the applicant as compensation and thereafter a decree of right over the property in dispute in favour of the ancestors of the applicant was passed; therefore, the property cannot vest in Waqfs and the same is not covered under Muslim Waqf Act since the property has been granted by the British Government, i.e. Non-Muslim.
Section 9: That in any case the property in dispute is out of the purview of the restriction imposed by Section 2 of Muslim Waqfs Act 1936 because a considerable portion of income is spent by the applicant towards persona requirement.
Section 10: That the applicant is filing this objection in compliance of the order of the Hon'ble Court which may kindly be accepted and taken on record . In case the objections are not found sufficient or satisfactory, the applicant be afforded opportunity to plead his case through counsel before the Hon'ble Court.
Applicant Syed Mohd. Zaki 19/20/7/1938 (B) Exhibit A-65 (Suit-1) (Register 8, page 537) is a copy of the notice dated 11.04.1945 given by the Secretary Shia Waqf Board to Sunni Central Waqf Board.
(C) Exhibit A-66 (Suit-1) (Register 8, page 539-545) is a copy of the letter/reply dated 20.11.1943 of Kalbe Husain Mutwalli of the disputed building which reads as under:
‫ملحظہ جناب سیکریٹری صاحب سنی وقف بورڈ لکھنؤ‬ ‫ء‬۴۳ ‫اکتوبر سن‬۲۷ ‫ مورخہ‬527 ‫جواب چیٹی نمبر‬ ‫؎یہ بلکل غلط ہےکہ ہندوسادھو مسجد میں کوی زیادتی کییر رہتا ہےھتے۔‬۱‫۔‬ ‫مسجد کے بیرونی احاطہ کے اندر جہاں وہ لوگ جسییکی بییابت انکییو عییدالت‬ ‫سے حق حاصل ہے اس چپریہ کا شمالی حصہ گر گیا ہے جو اسی طییرح پیڑا‬ ‫ہوا ہے۔ ممکن ہے کہ کچھ ٹیڑھتا ہتو گیییاہو یییا گییر جییانے سیے کچیھ زیییادہ‬ ‫معلوم ہوتا ہو۔ جس قت وہ چپریہ نبوانے لگیں گے اسیی کیی پیمیاءش کرکیے‬ ‫حضور کو مطلع کرونگا۔ اس چپر سے مسجد کا کوءی تعلق نہیں ہے۔‬ ‫ یہ کہ چٹای فیرش جاءنمیاز وغیییرہ صییرف روزمیرہ کییی ضییورت‬: ۲ ‫نمبر‬ ‫ب ھر کییو موجییود رہتییا ہے بییاقی فییرش جاءنمییاز وغیییرہ علحییدہ مولییوی‬ ‫عبدالغفارپیش امام کے یہاں رکھا رہتا ہے۔ جسکو موذن ہر جمعہ کییو لیے اتییا‬ ‫ہے اور نماز جمعہ پھر وہیں رکھ دیا جاتا ہتے کیییوں کیہ اکییثر فییرش وغیییرہ‬ ‫‪2941‬‬ ‫مسجد سے چوری ہو گیا ہے۔ اس وجہ سے کل فرش ہروقت نہیں رہتا۔‬ ‫نمیییبر ‪ :۳‬ییییہ کیییہ سیییفیدی اور مرمیییت اکتیییوبر سییین ‪ ۴۱‬مییییں ہوی ت ھی۔‬ ‫ٹھکیدارسفیدی کی ایک نقل رسید مزدوری خانہ خییدمت ہتے۔ دوسییرے سییال‬ ‫بوجہ ہواءی اڈہ کی تعمیر سے اینٹ اور مسالہ نہیں ملتا تھا بوجہ سفیدی نہیں‬ ‫ہو سکی۔ صرف زینا باہر سے ہوا تھا امسال ضرورت سییفیدی اور مرمییت‬ ‫کی ضرورت ہے جسکی میں فکر کر رہا ہوں‬ ‫نمبر ‪ :۴‬پیییش امییام کییی تنخییواہ مییاہ اگسییت سین ‪ ۴۳‬آخییر شییوال حییال تییک‬ ‫صرف ‪۷‬روپیہ باقی ہے اور کوی بقایا نہیں ہے۔ ایییک نقییل رسییید پیییس امییام‬ ‫ارسال خدمت ہے۔‬ ‫نمبر ‪ :۵‬مسجد کہ متعلق نہ کوی وقف ہے نہ کییوی اسییوقت تییک کییوی متییولی‬ ‫مقرر ہوا۔ جاءداد متعلقہ شییاھی معییافی ہے جییو مورثییان کییو ملییی ت ھی اور‬ ‫جاءداد مذکور کا بحیثیت مسلمان ہونےکے انتظییام و دیک یھ ب ھال و مرمییت‬ ‫وغیرہ کیا کرتا پھر اسطرح میں بھی۔ ‪۱۷‬فروری ‪۴۱‬ء سے نمبردار مقییرر‬ ‫ہوا ہوں اور مسجد کا کام انجام دیتا ہوں۔‬ ‫نمبر ‪ :۶‬یہ کہ بموجب حکم ‪ ۲۷‬اکتوبر ‪ ۴۳‬سنی وقف بورڈجناب سید رحمت‬ ‫حسیین صییاحب اییڈوکیٹ کیے پییاس بغیرض جانییچ حسییابات گییا ت ھا اڈییٹر‬ ‫صاحب نے ‪ ۴۱‬نومبر یوم اتوار کو جانچ کیلے بلیا ہے۔‬ ‫نمبر ‪ :۷‬ہملوگوں کو اسکی بلکل خبر نہیں ہے کہ وقف کمیشیینر صییاحب ن یے‬ ‫کیا فیصلہ کیا تھا چونکہ وقف بورڈ نے جایداد سیینی وقییف بییورڈ مییں شییامل‬ ‫کی گی ہے اسوجہ سیے مجبییورًا اسییکے احکامییات کییی پانبییدی کییر ر ہا ہوں‬ ‫اسییکے متعلییق عییدالت دیییوانی سیے مجبییورًا چییارہ جوہوںکیییوں کیہ بینییاءے‬ ‫مخاصمت بعد گرفت پیدا ہوگی جسکا منتظر ہوں۔‬ ‫نمبر ‪ :۸‬یہ رقم چندہ اس کاغذ کے ساتھ جمع ہونا چییاہے کیہ جایییداد جسییکی‬ ‫امدنی سے یہ رقم ادا کی جاتی ہے وقف نہیں بلکہ ناانکار معییافی ہے جسییکی‬ ‫نقلیں فراہم کر کے آیندہ روانہ کرونگا جو روپییہ بوقییف چنییدہ فرا ہم ہتے کییل‬ ‫حسابات پیش کرنے کے بعد روانہ کرونگا اگییر کچیھ کمییی رہ جاو ےگ تییو‬ ‫پھر روانہ کرونگا۔‬ ‫نمبر ‪ :۹‬یہ جایداد وقف نہیں ہے بلکیہ نانکییار معییافی ہے جسییکی نقلییں فرا ہم‬ ‫کرکے روانہ کرونگا۔‬ ‫نمییبر ‪ :۱۰‬حسییاب خییرچ بالکییل صییحیح ہےجسییکی تصییدیق حییاکم تحصیییل‬ ‫‪2942‬‬ ‫صاحب بہادر کر چکے ہیں یہ غلط ہے کیہ سییفیدی مسیجد نہییں ہوءی حسیاب‬ ‫سفیدی صحیح ہے امسال سفیدی نہیں ہوءی انتظام کر رہا ہوں۔‬ ‫نمبر ‪ :۱۱‬پیش امام کی تنخواہ ماقبل والے سال کی ‪ ۳۵‬روپیہ باقی تھی اور‬ ‫حال کی ‪ ۴۰‬روپیہ تھی جو اس سال ادا کی گی اس طرح موزن کی تنخواہ‬ ‫باقی رہ گی تھی جسکا حساب مداخلہ عدالت کو بھی دک ھا چکییا ہوں۔ نقییل‬ ‫رسید پیش امام روانہ ہے۔‬ ‫نمبر ‪ :۱۲‬یہ بدنظمی کی شکایت بالکل غلط ہے۔ عالیجاںیہ مسجد ایسے موقعہ‬ ‫پر واقعہ ہے کہ اکثر بلوے ہوچکے ہیں اور ہر وقت ایدنشہ نقص امیین کییا رہتییا‬ ‫ہے اسوجہ سے صورتحال کو دیکھ کر انتظام کیا جاتا ہے۔‬ ‫دوسری وجہ شکایت کی محض میرے شیعہ ہونے مولییوی پیییش امییام وغیییرہ‬ ‫کرتے ہیں اور دوسروں کو بھی امادہ کرتے ہیں ورنہ ایسا کچھ نہیں ہے۔‬ ‫لہذا یہ ادب گزارش ہے کہ ہمارےجوابات کییو حضییور ملحظ یہ فرمییاءیں اگییر‬ ‫کسی الفاظ میں کوی گستاخی ہوءی ہو تو معاف فرمادیں اگر کچھ کمی رہ‬ ‫گی ہو تو اس سے مطلع فرمادیں‬ ‫المرقوم ‪ ۲۰‬نومبر ‪۱۹۴۳‬ء‬ ‫بقلم خود سید کلب حسین ولد سید محمد رضی‬ ‫ساکن بہورن پورہ ڈاکخانہ درشن نگر ضلع فیض آباد۔‬ ‫‪^^oeqykfgtk cuke lsdzsV~h lkgsc lqUuh oDQ cksMZ] y[kuÅ cuke fpV~Bh‬‬ ‫‪uEcjh 527 eksofjs[kk 27 vDVqcj] lu~ 43 bZ0‬‬ ‫‪ua0 1& ;g fcydqy xyr gS fd fgUnw lk/kw efLtn esa dksbZ T;knrh dj‬‬ ‫‪jgk gS efLtn ds c s: uh gkr s d s vUnj tgk a og yk sx ftldh‬‬ ‫‪ckcr mudk s vnkyr ls gd gkfly gS ml ij NIij ;k dk‬‬ ‫‪lq e kyh fgLlk fxj x;k gS tks mlh rjg iM+k gqvk gSA eqefdu gS‬‬ ‫‪fd dqN Vs<+k gks ;k fxj tkus ls dqN T;knk ekywe gksrk gSA ftl o[r‬‬ ‫‪og Nifj;k cuokus yxsxsa mldh iSekbl djds gqtqj eqRryk d:axkA‬‬ ‫‪ml NIij ls efLtn dk dk sb Z reYyqd ugh a gS A‬‬ ‫‪ua02& ;g fd pVkbZ Q'kZ tkuekt+ oxSjg flQZ jkstejkZ dh t:jr Hkj‬‬ ‫‪dks ekStwn jgrk gSA okdh Q'kZ tkuekt+ oxSjg vykfgnk ekS y oh‬‬ ‫‪vCnqy xQ~Qkj isl beke ds ;gk a jD[kk jgrk g S ftldk s‬‬ ‫‪eq v fTtu gj tq e s dk s ys vkrk gS vkS j ckn uekt + tq e k fQj‬‬ ‫‪ogh a j[k fn;k tkrk gS D;k sa f d vdlj QlZ oxS j g efLtn‬‬ ls pk sj h gk s x;k gS A ml otg ls dq y Q'kZ gjo[r ugh a jgrkA ua03& lqQsnh vkSj ejEer vDVwcj lu~ 41 ls gqbZ FkhA Bsdsnkj lqQsnh dh ,d ud+y jlhn et+nwjh [kkuk f[kner gSA nwljs lky cotg gokbZ vM~Ms dh rkehj ds bZaVs vkSj elkyk ugha feyrk FkkA bl otg ls lqQsnh ugha gks ldhA flQZ t+huk ckgj gqvk FkkA belky t:jr lqQsnh vkSj ejEer dh t:jr gS ftldh eSa fQdzz dj jgk gwaA ua04& is'k beke dh ru[okg ekg vxLr lu~ 43 vkf[kj 'kkcku gky rd flQZ 7 :0 ckdh gS vkS j dk sb Z cdk;k ugh a gS A ,d udy jlhn isl beke gjlky f[kner gSA nQk 5& efLtn ds eqrkfyd u dksbZ otg gS vkSj u dk sb Z ml o[r rd dk sb Z eqroYyh eq d jZ j gq v k gS A tk;nkn eqrkfydk lkgh eqvkQh gS tks ewfjlku dks feyh Fkh vkSj tk;nkn et +d wj dk uEcjnkj ogS f l;r eq l yeku gk su s ds bUrtke o ns[kHkky o ejEer oxSjg fd;k djrk gSA bl rjg ls Hkh 16 Qjojh] 41 ls uEcjnkj eq d jZ j gq v k gw a vkS j efLtn dk dke vutke n sr k gw a A nQk6& ;g fd oekSfto gqDe 26 vDVqcj lu~ 43 bZ0 lqUuh oDQ cksMZ tuko ls jger gqlSu lkgsc] ,MksdsV ds ikl oxjt tkap fglkckr x;k FkkA vkMhVj lkgsc us 21 uoEcj ;kSe brokj dks tkap ds fy;s cqyk;k gSA nQk 7& ge yksxksa dks bldh fcydqy [kcj ugha gS fd oDQ dfe'uj lkgsc us ;g QSlyk fd;k Fkk pwWafd oDQ~ cksMZ us tk;nkn lqUuh oDQ~ cksMZ esa 'kkfey dh xbZ gSA bl otg ls etcwju mlds vgdkekr dh ikcUnh dj jgk gwaA blds eqrkfyd vnkyr nhokuh ls etcwju pkjktqbZ djus dk gwaA fcuk; eq[kkfler ckn xtV iSnk gksxh ftldk eqUrftj gwaA nQk 8& ;g jde pUnk bl mt+ ds lkFk tek gksuh pkfg;s fd - - - ftldh vkenuh ls ;g jde vnk dh tkrhg gS oDQ+ ugha gS cfYd ekfydkuk eqvkQh gS ftldh udysa Qjk;e djds vkgUnk joku-- d:axk tks #i;k ckcr pUnk cksMZ Qjkg~e ds dqy fglkckr is'k djus ds ckn jokuk d:axk vxj dqN deh jg tk;sxh rks fQj jokuk d:axkA nQk 9& ;g tk;nkn oDQ~ ugh a gS cfYd ukudkj ekQh gS ftldh udysa Qjkgse djds jokuk d:axkA nQk 10& fglkckr [kpZ fcYdqy lgh gS ftldh rLohd gkfde rglhy lkgsc cgknqj dj pqds gSaA ;g xyr gS fd lQsnh efLtn ugha gqbZ fglkc lqQsnh lgh gSA belky lqQsnh ugha gqbZ gS bUrtke dj jgk gwWaA nQk 11& is'k beke dh rU[okg ekg dCy okys lky dh 23 :0 ckdh Fkh vkSj gky dh 40 :0 Fkh tks bl lky vnk dh xbZA bl rjg eqvfTtu dh ru[okg ckdh jg xbZ Fkh ftldks fglkc eqnfo[kyk vnkyr esa Hkh fn[kk pqdk gwaA udy jlhn is'k beke jokuk gSA nQk 12& ;g couTeh dh f'kdk;r fcYdqy xyr gSA vkyhtkgk ;g efLtn , sl s ekS d s ij okd s gS fd vdlj cyo s gk s pq d s gS vkSj gj lky - - -vUns'kk uq[l veu dk jgrk gSA bl otg ls lwjrgky dks ns[krs gq;s - - bUrtke fd;k tkrk gSA nwljh otg f'kdk;r dh egd esjs f'k;k gksus ls ekSyoh is'k beke cxSjg djrs gSa vkSj nwljksa dks Hkh veknk djrs gSaA ojuk ,slk ugh gS fygktk ovno xqtkfjl gS fd gekjs vck gqtwj eqykfgtk djek dj vxj dskbZ vyQkt xqLrk[kh - - - -ekQ Qjek;sxsaA vxj dqN deh jg xbZ gks rks - - - - vyejde 20 uoEcj lu~ 1943 bZ0^^ " Before Secretary, Sunni Waqf Board, Lucknow, letter no. 5607 dated 27.10.43, reply letter no. 527 dated 27.10.43.
1. That it is totally wrong that Hindu Sadhus are exceeding their limits in the mosque. The northern portion of the thatch over the land over which they own right conferred by the Court, has fallen down and is lying as it was. It is possible that on account of being bent or fallen it appears to be bigger in size. When they will start erecting the thatch, your honour will be informed after measurement. That cottage has no concern with the mosque.
10.That floor mats (used for sitting at the time of offering Namaz) are available only to the extent of routine use.
Remaining floor mattress etc. are separately kept with Maulvi Abdul Gaffar, Pesh Imam, which are brought by the Moazzin on Fridays and are kept back at the same place after Namaz because most of the mattresses have been stolen from the mosque and for that reason the entire mattresses are not available at all times.

3. Whitewashing and repairs were carried out in October 1941. Copy of the contractor's receipt of whitewash with respect to wages to labourers is filed. The following year due to construction of aerodrome there was paucity of bricks and sticking material. For this reasons whitewashing could not be carried out. Only the outer stairs was whitewashed. This year, there is requirement of whitewashing and repairs for which I am concerned.

4. Salary of Pesh Imam from August 43 till the month of Shaban to the tune of Rs. 7/- is in arrears and there is no other dues except it. Copy of a receipt of payment of salary to Pesh Imam is filed.

5. There is neither any waqf in respect of the mosque nor any Mutwalli has been appointed till date. The property is Nankar Shahi Maafi which was granted to the ancestors of the applicant on account of being a Mussalman and Numberdar and they looked after the management and repairs etc. Likewise, from 17.2.1941 I have been appointed Numberdar and performs the work of mosque.

6. That order dated 27.10.1943 of Sunni Waqf Board was sent to Sri Syed Rahmat Hussain, Advocate for purposes of audit of accounts. Wadekar Saheb called for scrutiny on 21 November , Sunday.

7. We are not aware as to what decision had been taken by the Waqf Commissioner since Waqf Board. Since the property in question has been included in the Sunni Waqf Board, for this reason, being helpless I am abiding by this order. For this purpose, being left with no option I intend to approach the Civil Court since cause of action will arise after gazette publication for which I am waiting.

8. This amount of subscription should be deposited with the stipulation that the property from which this amount is fetched, is not a waqf rather it is Malikana Maafi, copy of which would be submitted after procuring the same. The amount which is available will be submitted after complete accounting and in case there is any defect, that would be again sent.

9. This property is not Waqf rather it is Nankar Maafi, copy of which will be sent after procuring it .

10. Account of expenditure is totally correct which has been verified by the Tehsildar. It is wrong that the mosque was not whitewashed. Account of whitewashing is correct. This year no whitewash was carried out and I am managing for the same.

11. Salary of Pesh Imam was in arrears of Rs. 35/-of the previous year and for the current year Rs. 40/- which has been paid to him. In this way, the salary of Moazzin stands due and the account regarding it has been given to the Court. Copy of receipt of Pesh Imam is filed.

12. That the complaint of mismanagement is wholly wrong. Sir, this mosque has been built on such a place where often riots took place and every year there is apprehension of breach of peace. Therefore, seeing the situation, arrangement is made. The second reason of compliant is since I am a Shia, Maulvi, Pesh Imam are against me and also provoke others too. Otherwise, it is not so. Therefore, it is respectfully prayed that my reply may kindly be considered and in case it contains anything mischievous I may be pardoned and if any defects has crept in, the same may kindly be communicated to me. Syed Kalabe Husain, s/o Mohd. Razi, r/o Bahoranpur, P.O. Darshan Nagar, Fyzabad. 20.11.1943."

This document shows that the movable items necessary for namaz were not kept in the building in dispute and were brought every time on Friday by Muazzin and after namaz, the same were taken away. This also shows an admission of the author that there was only Friday namaz in the building in dispute and the outer courtyard has nothing to do with mosque.

(D) Exhibit A-62 (Suit-1) (Register 8, page 519) is a copy of the notice dated 25.11.1948 from Secretary Sunni Waqf Board Lucknow to Munshi Javvad Husain to the following effect:

۴۸ ‫ نومبر‬۲۵ ‫ مورخہ‬۵۰۰۷ ‫؎نقل مراسلہ‬ ‫ یو۔پی۔لھکنؤ۔‬،‫منجانب سکرٹری سنی سنٹرل وقف بورڈ‬ 26 ‫منشی جواد حسین صاحب مشمولہ مثل وقف نمبر‬ ‫مسجد بابری ضلع فیض آباد‬ ‫منشی جییواد حسییین صییاحب مسییجد بییابری ایودھیییا فیییض آبییاد۔ نورالحسیین‬ ‫ فیض آباد ک یے متییولی سییید کلییب‬۲۶ ‫صاحب کے خط سے معلوم ہوا کہ وقف‬ ‫ جون سیے اپ ان کییی جگیہ بطییور متییولی‬۲۷ ‫حسین کا انتقال ہو گیا ہے اور‬ ‫کام کر ہے ہیں مگر اس امرکی اطلع اپ نے دفتر وقف بییورڑمیں نہی یں دی‬ ‫تحریر کیجءے کہ کلب حسین صاحب کے بعد حق تولیت آپ کییو کییس طییرح‬ ‫حاصل ہے ۔ نیزدرخواست تو لیت معہ ایک روپیہ فیس درخواسییت ب ھی روا‬ ‫نہ کیجءے۔‬ ‫دستخط سکرٹری‬ "Copy of Murasla 5007/26/7 dated 25.11.1948 from Secretary Sunni Central Waqf Board U.P. Lucknow.
Munshi Jawad Husain Saheb included in the Waqf No. 26, Masjid Babri, District Faizabad.

To, Munshi Jawad Husain, Masjid Babri, Oudh, Faizabad. I have come to know from a letter from Noorul Hasan that on November 26 Mutawalli Syed Kalbe-Husain of Faizabad expired and since June 27 you are working as Mutawalli. But you have not informed the Board about this so far. Please inform us as to how you inherit right of Tauliat through Syed Kalbe Husain. More over the also sent Rs. 1/- as fees along with application for Tauliat . Sd/-

Secretary ( English ) 25/11/48."

It appears that earlier Mutwalli Syed Kalbe Husain died in June 1948 and, thereafter, Jawad Husain took over charge to function as mutwalli on 27.6.1948. (E) Exhibit A-61 (Suit-1) (Register 8, page 515) is a copy of the application filed by Abdul Gaffar Pesh Imam sent to the Waqf Commissioner Faizabad complaining about non payment of salary by the Mutwalli Syed Mohd. Zaki of the disputed building.

‫نقل درخواست عبد الغفار پیش امام مسجد بابری واقعہ رام کوٹ شہر اجود‬ ‫ء‬۱۹۳۸ ‫ اگست‬۲۰ ‫ھیا قبض آباد‬ ‫پیش کردہ روبرو جناب وقف کمشنر بہادر‬ ‫ضلع فیض آباد‬ ‫ ضلع فیض آباد‬۲۶ ‫مشمولہ مثل دفعہ‬ ‫بحضور جناب وقف کمیشنر بہادر ضلع فیض آباد۔ جناب عالی دامہ اقبالہ۔‬ ‫فدوی منجاب محمد سید ذکی صاحب مہتمم بابری مسجد )واقع موضع رام‬ ‫‪2949‬‬ ‫کوٹ شہر اجودھیا(بطور پیش امام مسجد مذکور مشارہ۔۔۔ مقرر ہے مہتمم‬ ‫مزکور کبھی تنخواہ باقاعدہ ادا نہیں کرتا ہے چنانچہ ‪ ۳۱‬دسمبر ‪۱۹۳۵‬ء‬ ‫تک مبلغ روپیہ ‪ ۲۷۴‬ذمہ مہتمم مذکور فدوی کا بابت تنخواہ یا فتنی تھا‬ ‫جسکی بابت مہتمم مذکورنے ایک اقرار نامہ بتاریخ ‪ ۲۵‬جولءی ‪۳۶‬ء‬ ‫تحریر کر دیا۔ جسکی رو سے ۔۔ ‪ ۳۱‬اکتوبر ‪۳۸‬ء کل رقم بامشتاط ادا ہونا‬ ‫تحریر تھا مگر اسوقت تک صرف مبلغ ‪ ۵۰‬روپیہ محصول ہوا اور مبلغ‬ ‫‪ ۲۳۴‬روپیہ ہنوز غیر سودی تھا۔ ابتداء رقم مذکور کے مبلغ ‪ ۱۵۵‬روپیہ‬ ‫یکم جنوری ‪۳۶‬ء من تہ ‪ ۳۱‬جولءی ‪۳۸‬ء مبلغ پابند تنخواہ اور یاتنی‬ ‫مہتمم مذکور سے دلیا جاءے گا۔ لہذا اقبال ادب گزارش ہے کہ از راہ‬ ‫خاوندی رقم یاتنی مہتہم مذکور سے دلیا جاءیگا حکم صادر فرمایا‬ ‫جاوے ۔۔۔المرموم ‪ ۲۰‬اگست ‪۱۹۳۸‬ء دستاویز اقرار نامہ محمولہ در منسلک‬ ‫درخواست ہذا ہے۔ بعد معاینہ درج ہذا سے عرضی مدعی عبدالغفار پیش‬ ‫امام مسجد بابری واقع رام کوٹ شہر ایودھیا ساکن محلہ قضیانہ شہر‬ ‫اجودھیا۔ دستخط عبدالغفار‬ ‫‪"Copy of the application of Abdul Ghaffar Pesh Imam‬‬ ‫‪Babri Masjid situated at Ram Kot, Ayodhya City dated‬‬ ‫‪August 20, 1938 submitted Before the Waqf Commissioner,‬‬ ‫‪District Faizabad in respect of Waqf No.26.‬‬ ‫‪Before the Waqf Commissioner, District Faizabad‬‬ ‫‪Sir,‬‬ ‫‪That the applicant was appointed as Pesh Imam on‬‬ ‫‪monthly salary of Rs. 5/- by Mahammad Syed Zaki‬‬ ‫‪Mutawalli Babri Masjid Situated at Mohalla Ram Kot,‬‬ ‫‪Ayodhya city. The Mohtamim (Manager/Mutwalli) never‬‬ ‫‪pays his salary regularly. As such upto December 31, 1935.‬‬ ‫‪Rs 274/- fell due against the said Mohtamim, regarding‬‬ ‫‪which the said Mohtamim executed an agreement on July‬‬ ‫‪25, 1936 according to which, the entire amount due was to‬‬ ‫‪be paid by October 31, 1938. But till now only Rs 40/-‬‬ ‫‪could be paid and Rs.234/- without interest is still due.‬‬ ‫‪2950‬‬ ‫‪Besides, a sum of Rs. 155/- towards salary from 1.1.1936 to‬‬ ‫‪31.7.1938 @ Rs.5/ per month is also due. As such, total Rs.‬‬ ‫‪389/- is still due. Therefore with all the due respect, it is‬‬ ‫‪prayed that the arrears of my salary may kindly be ordered‬‬ ‫‪to be paid. Sd/-August 20, 1938.‬‬ ‫‪The document of agreement as referred to above is‬‬ ‫‪enclosed. It may be returned after perusal. Applicant:‬‬ ‫‪Abdul Ghaffar, Pesh Imam Masjid Babri Situated at‬‬ ‫‪RamKot, Ayodhya City, R/o Mohalla Kaziana,Ayodhya‬‬ ‫"‪City.‬‬ ‫‪(F) Exhibit A-63 (Suit-1) (Register 8, page 523-527) is a‬‬ ‫‪copy of the report dated 10.12.1949 of Mohd. Ibrahim in‬‬ ‫‪respect of Waqf No. 26 Masjid Babri. It reads as under:‬‬ ‫نقل رپورٹ مسٹر محمد ابراھیم صاحب وقف سکریٹری مورخہ ‪۱۰‬دسییمبر‬ ‫‪۴۹‬ء بابت مسجد بابری مشمولہمثل ‪ 26‬یوسی بابری فیض آباد‬ ‫مسجد بابری اجودھیا‬ ‫سکرٹری صاحب۔ مسجد بابری اجودھیا کے متولیان پہلے یکے بعد دیگییرے‬ ‫میر اصغر صاحب۔ محمد رضی صاحب محمد ذکیی صیاحب۔ کلیب حسیین‬ ‫صاحب سابق متولی کا انتقال ہو گیا ہے ل ہذا دوسییرے متولیییان مییں تکییرار‬ ‫سوال پیدا ہوا کہ موضع سیہنواں مسییجد میذکور کیے لءے وقییف ہے مسییجد‬ ‫مذکور کا متولی ہمیشہ موضع سہنواں کییا نمییبردار ہوگییا۔ چلایییا ہے کیہ جییو‬ ‫نمبردار ہوتاہے وہی مسجد مذکور کا متولی بھی ہوتا ہے۔ محلہ مییں دریییافت‬ ‫سے اور تحقیقات سے معلوم ہوا کیہ موضییع سیہنواں کیے موجییودہ نمییبردار‬ ‫جناب جواد حسییین صییاحب ہییں اور و ہی وصییول تحصیییل کرتیے ہییں اور‬ ‫مسجد مذکور کا انتظییام ب ھی کرتیے ہییں۔ ل ہذا نیذیر حسیین صییاحب مکھییا‬ ‫موضع سہنواں نے بیان دیا کہ موجودہ نمبردار جنییاب جییواد حسییین صییاحب‬ ‫ہیں اور یہی وصول تحصیل کرتے ہیں اور مسیجد میذکور کیے متیولی بھتی‬ ‫ہیں۔ جناب جواد حسین صاحب کا بیییان قلمبنید کیییاانہونے اقییرار کیییا کیہ مییں‬ ‫نمبردار ہوں اور متولی ہوں اور انہوں نے اپنا بیان دیا کہ محنت سے تو بہت‬ ‫کام انجام دونگا اور مسجد کا ایک پیسیہ ب ھی غبیین نیہ کردنگییا اور باقاعییدہ‬ ‫‪2951‬‬ ‫حساب کتاب رکھونگا ور وقف بورڑ کے ہر حکم کی تعمیل بھی کرونگییا۔‬ ‫ٓصییحب کییا نییام‬ ‫اسی حالت میں مناسب یہ معلوم ہوتا ہے کہ جناب جواد حسین‬ ‫بطور متولی درج کر لیا جاوے۔ شہر فیض آباد میں سے معلوم ہوا کیہ ہنییدوں‬ ‫اور سکھوں کے خوف سے کوی شخص عشاء کیوقت نمییاز مسییجد مییذکور‬ ‫میں نہیں پٹھتا ہے اور رات کو اگر کویء مسافر مسجد میں رہ جاتا ہے تییو‬ ‫اسکو ہندو وغیرہ بہت تنگ کرتے ہیں۔ مسجد کے سحن کے بیاہر ہنیدوں کیا‬ ‫ایک مندر ہے جہاں بہت سے پنڈہ رہتے ہیں اور جو مسجد میں مسلمان جاتییا‬ ‫ہے اسے برا بھل کہتیے ہییں میوقعہ پیر گیییا اور تحقیقییات سیے معلییوم ہتوا کیہ‬ ‫مندرجہ بال باتیں صحیح ہیں۔ لوگوں نے یہاں تک کیا کہ مسجد کو ہندوں س یے‬ ‫کافی خطرہ ہے کہ اسکی دیوار وغیرہ کمزور نہ کریں مناسب یہ معلوم ہوتییا‬ ‫ہے کہ ایک تحریر ڈپٹی کمشنر فیض آباد کے پییاس روانیہ کییر دیییا جییاوے ک یہ‬ ‫کوءی مسلمانوں کو جو مسجد میں نمییاز پڑھنیے جییاتے ہییں ان کییو تنییگ نیہ‬ ‫کریں اور مسجد مذکور ایک شاہی عمارت ہے اسکے تحفظ کییا کییافی خیییال‬ ‫کیا جاوے۔‬ ‫دستخط مسٹر محمد ابراہیم انسپکٹر وقف بورڈ‬ ‫‪۱۰/۱۲/۴۹‬‬ ‫‪"Copy of the report Mr. Mohammad Ibrahim Saheb waqf‬‬ ‫‪Inspector, dated 10-12-1949 with regard to Babri Masjid‬‬ ‫‪included in the file 26 Waqf Masjid Babri, District‬‬ ‫‪Faizabad.‬‬ ‫‪Masjid Babri Ayodhya.‬‬ ‫‪To the secretary.‬‬ ‫‪The previous Mutawallis of Masjid Babri, were‬‬ ‫‪Mir Asghar Saheb, Mohammad Razi Saheb, Mohd Zaki‬‬ ‫‪Saheb and Kalbe Husain. Kalbe Hussain the previous‬‬ ‫‪Mutwalli has expired. Therefore, the question of successor‬‬ ‫‪Mutwalli has arisen. Village Sahanwa is Waqf for the‬‬ ‫‪aforesaid Masjid. Numberdar of village Sahanwa has been‬‬ ‫‪continuously appointed as Mutwalli of the aforesaid‬‬ ‫‪mosque. The person who is numberdar becomes Mutwalli‬‬ of the mosque in question. From query in the village it came to light that the present Numberdar of Mauza Sahanwa is Sri Javvad Hussain and he recovers Tehsil and is also Mutawalli of the Waqf Masjid. Statement of Janab Javvad Hussain Saheb was recorded. He admitted that he was Numberdar as well as Mutwalli. He also stated that he would discharge duties of Tauliyat sincerely, would not embezzle even a single pie of the mosque and would maintain regular account and will comply each and every order of the Board. Under these circumstances, it seems proper that the name of Mr. Jawad Husain may be entered as Mutawalli. On investigation in Faizabad city it was revealed that because of the fear of Hindus and Sikhs no one goes into the Masjid to pray Namaz Isha. If by chance any passenger stays in the Masjid he is being put in trouble by the Hindus. Out of the Sahan of Masjid there is a temple where many Pandas reside and they harass the Muslims whosoever visit inside the mosque. I went at the spot and from inquiries it was revealed that the said allegations are correct. Local went on saying to the extent that there is great danger to mosque from Hindus that they may harm its wall etc. Seems proper that a written complaint be sent to the Deputy Commissioner Faizabad so that nobody harasses the Muslims, going into the Masjid to offer Namaz. The Masjid is a Shahi monument and it should be preserved . Sd/- Mr. Mohd. Ibrahim. 10.12.1949"

(G) Exhibit A-64 (Suit-1) (Register 8, page 529-535) is a copy of the report dated 23.12.1949 of Mohd. Ibrahim, Waqf Inspector in respect of Waqf No. 26 Masjid Babri regarding its present condition. It reads as under:
‫‪2953‬‬ ‫نقل رپورٹ مسٹر محمد ابراہیم صاحب وقف انسپکٹر‬ ‫مورخہ ‪ ۲۳‬دسمبر ‪ ۴۹‬ء مشمولہ مثل وقف ‪۲۶‬‬ ‫وقف مسجد بابری ضلع فیض آباد‬ ‫موجودہ حالت مسجد بابری اجودھیا‬ ‫سکریٹری صاحب۔ میں ‪ ۲۲‬دسمبر ‪۴۹‬ء کو اجودھیا بعض تحقیقات‬ ‫موجودہ حالت مسجد بابری و قبرستان تحقیقات کرتا رہا جس سے مندرجہ‬ ‫ذیل حالت اور واقعات معلوم ہوے۔ عرصہ تین ماہ کا ہوتا ہے کہ بابا رھگو‬ ‫داس جنم استھان دیکھنے ایودھیا آءے تھے اور یہاں آکر بیراگیوں سے‬ ‫پجاریوں سے زوردار الفاظوں میں کہا تھا کہ جنم استھان پر راماین کا پاٹھ‬ ‫ہونا شاہءے اس بات کی شہرت تمام اطراف وجوار میں ہوگءی۔ بابا‬ ‫رگہوداس کے چلے جانے کے ایک ماہ کے بعد راماین کے پاٹح کیلیے‬ ‫ہزاروں ہندو اور پوجاری اور پنڈت جمع ہوے۔ ہفتوں پاٹھ رہا۔ اس درمیان‬ ‫میں بیراگیوں نے مسجد کے باہر سامنے اور دکھن والے قبرستان کا زیادہ‬ ‫تر حصہ کھدوا کربرابر کر دیا اور جھنڈی لگا دیا اور چند قبروں کی جگہ‬ ‫پر پتھر رکھ دیا ہے۔ راماین کے پاٹھ کیوقت بھی پولیس کا نتظام تھا مگر‬ ‫تب بھی قبروں کو کھود دیا گیا۔ پولیس نے چار ادمیوں کو پکڑا جو بعد‬ ‫کو ضمانت پر رہا ہوگے۔ خواجہ ہٹی رحمتہ اللہ علیہ کا مزار جو ٹیلہ پر اس‬ ‫قبرستان کے قریب ہی ہے اس مزار کو کھود کر برابر کر دیا۔ اور وہاں‬ ‫ایک بیراگی جھنڈا لگا کر مقیم ہو گیا ہے مسجد کے دروازہ صحن پر جو‬ ‫پختہ قبر ہے اسکو برابر کر کے بیراگی پتھر رکھکر بیٹھے ہیں۔ مسجد کے‬ ‫کنویں کے پاس ایک بیراگی چھپر ڈالکر بیٹھا ہے۔ پاٹھ سے پیشتر مسجد کا‬ ‫گھڑا اورلوٹا توڑا گیا۔ موذن کو مارا۔ اسکے بعد مسجد کے کتبہ‬ ‫کوکھودنیکی کوشش کی پھر دو پردیسی مسلمانوں کو مارا اور وہ کافی‬ ‫زخمی ہوءے۔ اب مسجد کے باہر دو خیمہ ہیں ایک میں پولس کے سپاہیان‬ ‫ہیں اور ایک میں بٹالین کے سپاہی رہتے ہیں اور دونوں کی کل تعداد‬ ‫‪۸،۹‬ہے۔ اب مسجد میں برابر تال بند رہتا ہے یعنی بجز بروز جمعہ کے‬ ‫کسی وقت نماز اور اذان نہیں ہوتی۔ مسجد کے تال کی کنجی مسلمانوں کے‬ ‫پاس رہتی ہے۔ پولیس تال نہیں کھولنے دیتی۔ تال جمعہ کے روز محض ‪۳‬۔‬ ‫‪ ۴‬گھنٹہ کے لے کھول جاتا ہے اور اسی دوران میں مسجد کی سفاءی‬ ‫وغیرہ اور جمعہ کی نماز ہوتی ہے پھر تال بدستور بند کر دیا جاتاتھا۔‬ ‫‪2954‬‬ ‫جمعہ کی نماز ہوتے وقت بیراگی بہت شور کرتے ہیں اور سیڑھی سے جب‬ ‫نمازی نیچے جاتے ہیں تو متصل مکانات سے نمازیوں پر جوتا اور ڈھیل‬ ‫آتا ہے۔ مسلمانان خوف کیوجہ سے کچھ نہیں بولتے۔ رگہوداس کے بعد مسٹر‬ ‫لوہیا بھی اجودھیا اءے تھے اور لیکچر وغیرہ دیا اور کہا کہ قبروں کی‬ ‫جگہ پر پھول وغیرہ کے درختان لگا دو۔ پھر حال میں لکھنؤ سے کوی‬ ‫منتری صاحب ّآے تھے ان سے بیراگیوں نے کہا کہ مسجد جنم بھومی ہے‬ ‫دل دو انہیں نے زیادتی کرنے کو منع کیا اسپر بیراگی ان پر خفا ہوے اور‬ ‫وہ پولیس کی حفاظت میں فیض آباد واپس چلے گے۔ اسی دوران میں‬ ‫اجودھیا کے کنک بھون کے مہنت بڑا استھان مسمی رگھور پرساد‬ ‫ویدانتی جی دیونراءن درسی‪ ،‬آچاریہ اشرفی بھون میں ان لوگوں نے‬ ‫مسلمانوں کو بلنا چاہا۔ پھر بخبر ظہور احمد کے کوءی نہیں گیا۔ ہندوں نے‬ ‫ظہور سے کہا کہ مسلمانوں سے مسجد ہمکو دل دو اور تو بھای بھای ورنہ‬ ‫دشمن ۔ میں رات کو اجودھیا ٹہرگیا۔ صبح کو معلوم ہوا کہ بیراگی مسجد‬ ‫پر زبردستی قبضہ کر رہے ہیں۔ آج جمعہ بھی ہے۔ میں موقعہ پر گیا تو کیا‬ ‫دیکھتا ہوں کہ دس پندرہ بیراگی ڈنڈا اور بھال وغیرہ لیکر مسجد کے‬ ‫صحن میں موجود ہیں اور بہت سے بیراگی مسجد کے دروازہ پر ڈنڈا‬ ‫وغیرہ لیکربیٹھے ہیں۔ اور اطراف و جوانب کے ہندو جمع ہورہے ہیں۔‬ ‫سٹی مجسٹریٹ کوتوال شہر اور پولیس وغیرہ کا کافی انتظام ہے مسلمان‬ ‫جمعہ کی نمازادا کرنے ضرورآویںگے نامعلوم کیا حشر ہو۔ میں اب دریا‬ ‫پار کر کے لکڑ منڈی گونڈہ کے لءے جا رہا ہوں۔‬ ‫‪"Copy of the report of Mohd. Ibrahim Saheb, Waqf‬‬ ‫‪Inspector Abul Bakra dated 23-12-1949 included in the‬‬ ‫‪Waqf file no. 26.‬‬ ‫‪Present condition of Babri Mosque , Ayodhya.‬‬ ‫‪To the secretary,‬‬ ‫‪On December 22, 1949 I visited Ayodhya to inquire‬‬ ‫‪into current state of affairs of the Masjid Babri and‬‬ ‫‪Qabristan and continued throughout the day. It revealed‬‬ ‫‪the following facts:‬‬ ‫‪Three months back Baba Raghu Das came to‬‬ Ayodhya to see Janamasthan and said emphatically to Bairagis and priests that recitation of Ramayan should be organized at Janamasthan. This news spread all around the nearby areas. After one month of departure of Baba Raghu thousands of Hindus, Pujaris and Pandits assembled there. The path (recitation) continued for weeks. During this period the Bairagis dug and levelled the most of the land in front of the Masjid and southern ‫عشری‬ ‫تھے اورہیں۔‬ ‫سید عبدالباقی‬ ‫سید ۔۔۔۔۔۔ علی‬ ‫سید حسین علی‬ ‫مسماۃ سکونت بی بی‬ ‫علی نقی‬ ‫محمد افضل‬ ‫محمد اصغر‬ ‫ناظم‬ ‫امجد علی‬ ‫محمد رضی‬ ‫علی‬ ‫حسین احمد‬ ‫محمد حسین‬ ‫جواد حسین‬ ‫میرحسین‬ ‫کلب حسین‬ ‫محمد ذکی‬ ‫سید حسین اصغر‬ ‫سید غلم اصغر‬ ‫سید ابوا لمحمد‬ ‫نورالحسن‬ Qabristan and pitched flag over there and placed stones on certain graves. Sufficient police force was deployed at the time of Ramayan recitation, even then certain graves were dug. The police arrested four persons who were later on bailed out. The Mazar of Khwaja Hati Rahamatullah which is situated on a mound near the Qabristan, has been demolished and a Bairagi after pitching a Jhanda (flag) stayed there. On the door of the lawn of the Masjid there was a pucca grave which has been levelled and the Bairagis are sitting after placing stones thereon. Near the well of the Masjid a Bairagi is living under a thatched roof. Before the path was held, the earthen pot and lota of the masjid were broken. The Moazzin was beaten up. They tried to destroy the inscription of the Masjid. Two Muslim pilgrims were beaten up and as such they sustained severe injuries. Now there are two tents outside the Masjid. One of them is occupied by police personnel. In other tent, sepoy of Batallion are living. Total number of these sepoys would be 8 to 9. Now the door of the Masjid remains locked. That is to say, except for Fridays, there held no Namaz or Azaan. The keys of the Masjid are with the Muslims, but the police does not allow to open the lock, which is opened only on Friday for 3-4 hours. During this period cleaning of the place is done and then Namaz is held. After this is over, the Masjid is again locked. During Friday prayer the Bairagis make hue and cry and when the Namazi pass through the stairs, shoes and rubbish is thrown on them from the adjoining houses. The Muslims are so scared that they do not protest. After Raghu Das, Mr. Lohia also visited Ayodhya and delivered a lecture in which he urged the people to grow flower trees in place of graves. However, some officer from Lucknow visited this place. The Bairagis told him that the Masjid was the Janam Sthan which should be handed over to them. He warned them against any violence. On this, Bairagis became angry with him, so he returned back to Faizabad under police protection. Meanwhile Mahant of Kanak Bhawan, Ayodhya, Raghubar Das, Vedanti Ji, Deo Narain Darsi, Acharyaji Ashrmi, attempted to invite Muslims for a talk. But no Muslim except for Zahoor Ahmad, turned up. The Hindus told him that the Masjid should be handed over to them, only then the two communities would be brothers otherwise enemies. I did stayed at Ayodhya in the night. In the morning, I came to know that Bairagis are trying to take possession over the Masjid forcefully. Today is Friday I visited the spot when I saw that 10-15 Bairagis armed Dandas and spears had assembled in front of the door of the mosque. Many of the Hindus of nearby localities were also asssembled there. City Magistrate, Kotwal city and police force were posted there. I do not know as to what will happen to the Muslims who would certainly come here for offering Friday prayers. Now I am proceeding to Lakad Mandi, Gonda. Sd/- 23.12.49" (ETC) 3104. These documents show at the best that, Namaj, only on Friday, used to be offered in the disputed structure in the inner courtyard and for rest of the period the building remain unattended by muslim. So far as the report of Waqf Inspector dated 10.12.1949 and 23.12.1949 are concerned almost all the witnesses of plaintiffs (Suit-4) who have been examined on this aspect have expressed their ignorance about his visit on the dates on which Mohammad Ibrahim claimed to have prepared the said reports. Neither the author has been examined nor even otherwise the two documents have been proved. The documents cannot be termed to be "public document" merely because the copy thereof has been issued by the Sunni Board since they do not answer the description of "public document" under Section 74 of the Evidence Act. Even otherwise the truth of the contents of these two documents, in accordance with law, was necessary to be proved. Mere filing of a document or marking as 'exhibit' does not mean, that the truth of the facts mentioned therein shall be deemed correct unless proved otherwise. We have already referred to the relevant law on this aspect and need not to repeat hereat.
3105. Besides above, there is a copy of the notification dated 26th February, 1944 under U.P. Act of 1936 (Exhibit A-34 (Suit-1) (Register 7, page 409-411) but this document is no more relevant since it has already been held invalid so far as the property in dispute is concerned vide the Civil Judge, Faizabad's order dated 21.04.1966. The plaintiffs have sought to mention that it is a Government Gazette but a perusal of the document shows that it is a document of the Sunni Board titled as a notification and not a copy of the Government Gazette. 3106. Exhibit A-71 (Suit-1) (Register 8, page 577) is a copy of Shajra Nasab (family tree) of owners of Mauza Bahooranpur, Pargana Haweli Oudh, Tahsil and district Faizabad Haqqiat Maafi in the form of Zammdari. A major portion of the document is illegible and could not be read or transliterated in Hindi and as such the portion which could be read is being quoted hereunder along with English translation.

‫شجرہ نسب مالیکان موضعہ بہورن پور پرگنہ حییویلی اودھ تحصیییل ضییلع‬ ‫فیض آباد حقیقت معافی بشکل زمیںداری مالداری‬ ‫سید عبدالباقی‬ :

‫سید ۔۔۔۔۔۔ علی‬ :
‫سید حسین علی‬ :
‫مسماۃ سکونت بی بی‬ :
‫علی نقی‬ ‫محمد افضل‬ ‫۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔‬ "Shajra Nasab (family tree) of owners of Mauza Bahooranpur, Pargana Haweli Oudh, Tahsil and district Faizabad Haqqiat Maafi in the form of Zammdari Mooris Ali Caste: Syed.
:
Syed Abdul Baqi :
Syed Zuber Ali :
               :                      :
        Syed Husain             Mohd. Gaus
              :
         Bibi Sakaran
                  :
           :              :                 :
        Mohd. Afzal Ali Taqi            (Sic)


3107. Considering the entirety of the above evidence and discussion and in the absence of anything contrary, we are satisfied that prior to 1855, there is no evidence of possession by Muslims of the property in suit. They did not have possession of the premises in outer Courtyard atleast since 1856-57 when the dividing wall was raised by the Britishers. They at the best might have enjoyed only the right of passage so as to enter the inner courtyard. The entry in the outer courtyard using part of the premises as passage would not constitute 'possession'. As we have already discussed in detail, the possession means power of control over the matter of subject. If it is a physical control, it should be either actual or a possession of a nature which is so treated in the eyes of law. Possession is a polymorphous term. It has different meanings in different contexts. One of the simple definition is a visible possibility of exercising physical control over a thing compelled with the intention of doing so either against all the world or against all the world except some persons. All these things are missing so far as the premises within the outer courtyard is concerned wherein there existed non Islamic structures which were visited and worshipped by Hindus continuously since as long as back as noticed by Tieffenthaler in 18th century i.e. between 1766 to 1771 when he visited Avadh area. The possession in the outer courtyard was open and to the knowledge of Muslim parties, inasmuch, a person, claimed himself to be the Mutwalli of the Mosque in dispute, made several complaints, as is evident from the documents of 1858 and onwards, but the fact remains that those structures continued in the said premises and the entry of Hindus and their worship also continued. In this context, the claim of the plaintiffs that the entire property in dispute i.e. the outer and inner courtyard had been in their possession upto 1949 cannot be accepted.
3108. However, so far as the inner courtyard is concerned, though it cannot be said that the muslims never visited the premises in the inner courtyard or no Namaj ever was offered therein till 1949, but that by itself would not constitute possession of the property in dispute in the manner the term 'possession' is known in law. This is a beneficiary enjoyment by the plaintiffs muslim parties shouldering with their Hindu brethren and visiting premises within the inner courtyard for the purpose of worshipping in their own way. On this aspect various angles we have already noticed above. An additional factor is that on the one hand it is the claim of plaintiffs that since regular Namaj used to be held in the disputed building and the requisite material like Farsh, pitchers, broom etc. was also present and in the custody of Moazzim, but, no such material was found by the Receiver when he took charge of the premises in the inner courtyard pursuant to Magistrate's order dated 29.12.1949. The inventory which he had prepared, nowhere mention any item which relates to muslim use for Namaj and instead all the items relates to worship by Hindus. None has made any complaint that the goods meant for Namaj have been damaged, looted or stolen by anybody. There is a complete silence on this aspect of the matter. In 1934 when there was a riot and there was substantial damage to the building, in respect to the goods allegedly kept in the disputed building a claim was made by Syed Mohd. Zaki giving details of those items but nothing of that sort has happened in December, 1949 or thereafter. Meaning thereby we have no option but to draw an inference that no such material existed thereat. This also weaken claim of the muslim with regard to exclusive possession, in the form of continuous worship.
3109. This is not the end. The documents referred above may not prove the claim of possession of the property in suit as such, but cumulative effect thereof is explicit that there was no abandonment by Muslims of the property in dispute. They continued to exercise their claim over it, got its recognition from Britishers in the form of grant. The maintenance of building by Muslims to the extent of disputed structure and partition wall is also evident. The defendants have not shown anything otherwise. The entry of Muslims in inner courtyard for Friday Prayer is also evident. The status of Hindus and Muslims both, in visiting the place in dispute is common i.e. worshippers. The only difference is that Hindus visit entire property while for Muslims it was confined to inner courtyard. Once the possession, may be a part of the premises, is proved, it relates back unless proved otherwise.
3110. Subject to what we have said above, the plaintiffs have failed to prove that the property in suit, i.e., premises marked as A B C D in the map appended to the plaint was in possession of the plaintiffs up to 1949. However, we may clarify that so far as the premises constituting inner courtyard is concerned this much can be said that Muslims and Hindus alike used to go therein and, therefore, possession of premises in the inner courtyard, if technically it can be said, remained with the members of both the communities. But so far as the outer courtyard is concerned, the plaintiffs lost possession thereof atleast from 1856-57 and onwards.
3111. So far as dispossession from the property in suit in 1949 is concerned, we are of the view that the question of dispossession of plaintiffs from outer courtyard does not arise since it was not in their possession in 1949 and prior thereto, as we have already discussed. So far as the inner courtyard is concerned they have discontinued with the possession atleast from 23rd December, 1949 and onwards while possession of Hindus which was earlier enjoyed by them alongwith members of Muslim communities is continue. So far as dispossession is concerned, neither the plaintiffs have alleged that they were dispossessed at any point of time nor have proved the same. Issue no. 2 (Suit-4) is, therefore, answered in negative and against the plaintiffs.
3112. Issue No. 10 and 15 (Suit-4) are covered by our findings already recorded in relation to issues 7 (Suit-1), 3 and 8 (Suit-3) and 2 (Suit-4) and, therefore, for the reasons stated therein, both these issues are answered in negative and against the plaintiffs and Muslims in general.
3113. So far as Issue No. 28 (Suit-4) is concerned, in view of our discussion and findings qua Issues No. 3 and 8 (Suit-3), it is evident that the disputed site has to be understood bifurcated in outer courtyard and inner courtyard. So far as outer courtyard is concerned, it is evident that the Hindu religious structures existed therein since last more than 150 years i.e. sometimes after 1856-57 and they are being managed and administered by the Priest of Nirmohi Akhara, defendant no. 3, Therefore, to that extent, i.e. to the extent only upto outer courtyard, the disputed site can be said to be possessed by defendant no. 3 and the plaintiff ceased to have possession of outer courtyard accordingly. So far as the inner courtyard, which is another part of the disputed site, it does not appear that the same remain in possession of any of the parties exclusively. This aspect also we have already considered above. The premises within inner courtyard remained to be visited by the members of both the communities meaning thereby there was no obstruction to any one to enter the same. This continued till 22nd December, 1949 and since thereafter the plaintiffs are ousted even therefrom but this ouster is immaterial since it was under the orders of District authorities initially and Court's order subsequently. Hence, not being voluntary, it would not make any difference. 3114. However, the defendants no. 3 is not able to prove that it was in possession of the disputed site, which for the purpose of the present suit, means the premises shown by letters A B C D in the map appended to the plaint, i.e., the inner courtyard and outer courtyard including the disputed structure. In the same manner plaintiffs have also failed to prove the same. These aspects we have already discussed in detail while considering issues no. 7 (Suit-1), 3 and 8 (Suit-3) and 2 (Suit-4). For the reasons and discussions therein, we answer issue 28 (Suit-4) holding that since the plaintiffs have already failed to prove their possession of the disputed premises as we have said while considering issue no. 2 (Suit-4), the further question whether the plaintiffs were never in possession does not arise. It is covered by our above discussions, reasons and findings. The defendant no. 3, however, has also failed to prove its possession of the disputed site (i.e., outer and inner courtyard including the disputed building) in its entirety ever. This we have discussed above. Issue 28 (Suit-4) is answered accordingly. 3115. So far as Issue No. 4 (Suit-4) is concerned, it is again based on the plea of adverse possession. None of the defendants in the suit in question has pleaded the ingredients as are necessary to encompass a claim of adverse possession. On the contrary, pleadings are that the place in dispute itself is a deity being birthplace of Lord Rama, has continuously been visited by Hindus for worship. In any case exclusive possession by Hindus of the premises in dispute has not been proved for the entire land in dispute, i.e., the disputed site. It is only the premises covered by the outer courtyard, as we have already discussed, since 1856-57, i.e., after the erection of dividing wall by the Britishers, muslims people have not used the same for any purposes, but so far as inner courtyard is concerned, the premises therein has not remained confined to be used only by Hindus. At times muslims have also visited to offer Namaj thereat. Therefore, so far as the outer courtyard is concerned, it may be said that the right of prayer by Hindus had perfected having continued exclusively for more than a century but the same would not apply so far as the premises within the inner courtyard is concerned, which has been used by both the sides may be more frequently by Hindus and occasionally or intermittently by muslims. Issue 4 (Suit-4) is answered accordingly.

3116. Issue 16 (Suit-5) at the first instance is covered by what we have discussed and held in regard to issues no. 7 (Suit-

1), 3 and 8 (Suit-3) and 2, 4, 10, 15 and 28 (Suit-4). Only one more aspect need be considered hereat. We have already answered the issues regarding plaintiffs 1 and 2 that they are juridical persons. The premises in dispute insofar as held to be the birthplace, if any, having been held to be a juridical person, question of its possession and the application of doctrine of adverse possession would not be attracted. Therefore, the question of loss of title would not arise. Consequently, the question of reacquisition of title also would not arise. 3117. The issue in question (latter part) has been framed based on the pleadings in para 29 of the plaint. It says that the idols were kept in the building in dispute in the night of 22/23 December, 1949. They remain thereat continuously. The attachment of the premises within inner courtyard by Magistrate and giving charge to Receiver did not affect the position of idol since they continued to stay where they were and continued to remain in possession of the property in dispute thereat. For their ejectment from the premises in question a suit could have been filed within 12 years. Suit-4 was filed on 18th December, 1961. Though it is true that the plaintiffs 1 and 2 were not party to the said suit and, therefore, an order of ejectment in their absence may not be passed against them but this is also true that their continuance in the inner courtyard is not on account of a total inaction on the part of muslim parties but due to the interim injunction order passed by the trial court directing the parties to maintain status quo. Later on similar orders were passed by this Court and Apex Court also. It is well settled that act of the Court shall prejudice none. Irrespective of whether the plaintiffs 1 and 2 are party in any suit or not but the order of injunction benefits them and restrain muslim parties from taking any action otherwise. The injunction order was passed on 16th January 1950 in one or the other manner is continuing till date. Later on similar orders were passed by others including this Court also. Therefore, the plaintiffs 1 and 2 in effect are the beneficiaries of judicial orders for retaining their position in the inner courtyard of the disputed site. It is well established that actus curae neminem gravabit.

3118. In Kerala State Electricity Board and another Vs. M.R.F. Limited and others, 1996 (1) SCC 597 the Court said:

"......it has been held by the Privy Council that one of the first and highest duties of all the Court is to take care that act of the Court does not cause injury to any of the suitors."
"There is no manner of doubt it is an imperative duty of the court to ensure that the party to the lis does not suffer any unmerited hardship on account of an order passed by the Court. The principle of restitution as enunciated by the Privy Council in rodger's case (Supra) has been followed by the Privy Council in later decisions and such principle being in conformity to justice and fair play be followed."
3119. In Gursharan Singh and others Vs. New Delhi Municipal Committee and others, AIR 1996 SC 1175, it has been held:

"In view of the legal maxim "acts curiae neminem gravidity" which means that an act of court shall prejudice no man, N.D.M.C. is justified in making a claim for interest over the arrears which have remained unpaid for more than 12 years because of the interim orders passed by this Court. This aspect of the matter has been examined by this Court in the case of Raj Kumar Dey and Ors. v. Tarapada Dey and Ors. [1988]1SCR118 . Although in the interim orders it has not been stated that in event of dismissal of the appeals and the writ petition, the appellants and the writ petitioner shall be liable to pay interest over the arrears of the licence fee, but that shall not debar this Court from passing any order in respect of payment of reasonable interest over the said amount."
3120. In Kanoria Chemicals and Industries Ltd and others Vs. U.P. State Electricity Board and others, JT 1997(2) SC 545 the Court said:

"It is equally well settled that an order of stay granted pending disposal of a writ petition/suit or other proceeding comes to an end with the dismissal of the substantive proceeding and that it is the duty of the court in such a case to put the parties in the same position they would have been but for the interim orders of the court. Any other view would result in the act or order of the court prejudicing a party (Board in this case) for no fault of its and would also mean rewarding a writ petitioner inspite of his failure. We do not think that any such unjust consequence can be countenanced by the courts."
3121. In South Eastern Coalfields Ltd. Vs. State of M.P. and others 2003 (8) SCC 648, the Court recognized the principle that wrong order should not be perpetuated by keeping it alive. Recognizing the maxim auctus curiae neminem gravabit, it was held that no one shall suffer by an act of the Court and such a rule is not confined to an erroneous act of the Court but act of the Court embraces within its purview all such acts as to which the Court may form an opinion in any legal proceedings that the Court would not have so acted had it been correctly apprised of the facts and law. It is duty of the Court to apply the restitution putting the parties in the same position as they would have been, had the order, subsequently found to be erroneous by the Court, would not have been passed. In para 28 of the judgment, it was held-

"The injury, if any, caused by the act of the court shall be undone and the gain which the parties would have earned unless it was interdicted by the order of the court would be restored to or conferred on the party by suitably commanding the party liable to do so. Any opinion to the contrary would lead to unjust if not disastrous consequences. Litigation may turn into a fruitful industry. Though litigation is not gambling yet there is an element of chance in every litigation. Unscrupulous litigants may feel encouraged to approach the Courts, persuading the Court to pass interlocutory orders favourable to them by making out a prima facie case when the issues are yet to be heard and determined on merits and if the concept of restitution is excluded from application to interim orders, then the litigant would stand to gain by swallowing the benefits yielding out of the interim order even though the battle has been lost at the end. This cannot be cannot be countenanced." (emphasis added) 3122. The decision in South Eastern Coalfields Ltd. (supra) taking note of the above principle has also been followed by this Court in Civil Misc. Writ Petition No. 41872 of 1992, Shesh Mani Tiwari Vs. District Inspector of Schools, Jaunpur and another, decided on 17.12.2009.
3123. In this context we are not inclined to admit the claim of the plaintiffs 1 and 2 which is based on the situation which has arisen, amongst other also, due to the judicial orders. We, therefore, answer issue no. 16 (Suit-5) by observing that in this case plea of adverse possession is not attracted either for the plaintiffs 1 or 2 or as claimed by defendant no. 4 and, therefore, relying on the plea of adverse possession neither there was any occasion of extinction of title, if any, of plaintiffs 1 and 2 nor reacquisition thereof. Issue no. 16 (Suit-5) is answered accordingly.

(K) Issues relating to characteristics of Mosque, dedication by Babur and whether a valid waqf was created. 3124. Issues no. 6 (Suit 3), 1, 1(B)(b), 1(B)(c), 19(d), 19(e), 19(f) (Suit 4) and 9 (Suit 5) fall in this category. 3125. Issue no.6 (Suit 3) is:

"Was this alleged mosque dedicated by Emperor Babar for worship by Muslims in general and made a public waqf property?"
3126. The necessary pleadings relevant for the above issue are in para 15 of the written statement of defendants no.6 to 8 and in para 15 of the replication filed by plaintiffs (Suit 3), which are as under:

**/kkjk 15& ;g fd ftl tk;nkn dk eqn~nS;ku us nkok fd;k gS og 'kgu'kkg fgUn ckcj ckn'kkg dh rkehj djnk e'kthn ekSlwes ckcjh elftn gS ftldks lgu'kkg etdwj us vius othj + + + +ds ,greke ls + + + + rkehj djk;kA vkSj eqlyekuku ds fy;s oDQ vke dj fn;k ftlesa reke eqlyekuku dk gd bcknr gSA** ¼Written Statement½ Para 15- That the property which has been claimed by the plaintiffs is the Babri Mosque built by Emperor Babar of India in his name, who got it built through his Minister . . . . and thereafter he made a waqf and consecrated to Muslims wherein Muslims have right of worship." (E.T.C.) "Para 15.- The allegations contained in para 15 of the written statement are totally incorrect and are denied. The property in suit is neither a mosque nor is it known as Babri Mosque, nor was it built by Emperor Babar through Mir Abdul Baqi. Nor was it made wakf. The property in suit is the temple of Janma Bhumi." (Replication) 3127. Issues No. 1, 1-B(b), 1-B(c), 19(d), 19(e) and 19(f) (suit 4) are:
Issue No.1 "Whether the building in question described as mosque in the sketch map attached to the plaint (hereinafter referred to as the building) was a mosque as claimed by the plaintiffs?"
Issue No.1-B(b) "Whether the building stood dedicated to almighty God as alleged by the plaintiffs ?" Issue No.1-B(c) "Whether the building had been used by the members of the Muslim community for offering prayers from times immemorial? If so, its effect?" Issue No. 19(d) "Whether the building in question could not be a mosque under the Islamic Law in view of the admitted position that it did not have minarets?" Issue No. 19(e) "Whether the building in question could not legally be a mosque as on plaintiffs' own showing it was surrounded by a graveyard on three sides?" Issue No. 19(f) "Whether the pillars inside and outside the building in question contain images of Hindu Gods and Goddesses? If the finding is in the affirmative, whether on that account the building in question cannot have the character of Mosque under the tenets of Islam?"
3128. In the plaint (Suit 4), the relevant pleadings are in paras 1, 2 and 21-B. Defendants no.1 and 2 in para 2 of their written statement hence denied that the alleged mosque was built as dictated by Babar. Similar is the denial by defendant no.3 in his written statement.
3129. In the written statement of defendant no.13, the relevant pleadings are in paras 11-A , 25 and 28 in which it is said:
"11-A....The attempt to raise a mosque-like structure did not succeed; and no 'mosque', deemed to be Waqf according to Muslim Law, ever came into existence. The act of Mir Baqi was a fleeting act of trespass . . . ., and no Muslim could by any such act of trespass or its repetition, confer any right, title or interest in the nature of a Waqf in favour of ALLAH for the purposes of a 'mosque'. "25. That the building in suit was no 'mosque' and its surrounding area was not a grave-yard. . . . . ALLAH DOES NOT accept Namaz offered at a place taken by force, or in a 'mosque' built on land obtained by Gasba or forcibly without title. It seems, therefore, that the three-
domed structure raised at Sri Rama Janma Bhumi . . . ., was not intended to be used as a 'mosque', and it was never used as 'mosque'. . . . . The alleged existence of a grave-yard all round it, also shows that the Muslims could not have gone to offer Namaz in the building, which was abandoned and never used as a 'mosque' by the Muslims."

28. That the following facts would show that the three- domes structure so raised by Mir Baqi was not a 'mosque' at all, namely---

(A) ALLAH does not accept a dedication of property for purposes recognised as pious and charitable, that is, as waqf under the Muslim Law, from a person who is not its rightful owner, for instance, ALLAH would not accept the dedication of stolen property from a thief. By his act of trespass supported by violence, for erecting a 'mosque' ....."

(B) Inspite of all that Mir Baqi tried to do with the Temple, the space always continued to best in possession with the Deities of BHAGWAN SRI RAMA VIRAJMAN and the ASTHAN SRI RAMA JANMA BHUMI. THEIR worshippers continued to worship THEM through such symbols as the CHARAN and the SITA RASOI, and the idol of BHAGWAN SRI RAMA LALA VIRAJMAN on the Chabutra, called the Rama Chabutra. No one could enter the three domed structure except after passing through these places of Hindu worship. According to the tenets of Islam there can be no Idol worship within the precincts of a 'mosque', and the passage to a 'mosque' must be free and unobstructed and open to the 'Faithful' at all times. It can never be land-locked by a Hindu place of worship; and there can be no co-sharing in title or possession with ALLAH, particularly in the case of a 'mosque'. His possession must be exclusive.

(C) A 'mosque', which is a public place of worship for all the Muslims, must have a minaret for calling the AZAN. According to Baillie-

"When an assembly of worshippers pray in a masjid with permission, that is delivery. But it is a condition that the prayers be with izan, or the regular call, and be public not private, for though there should be an assembly yet if it is without izan, and the prayers are private instead of public, the place is no masjid, according to the two disciples."
(Pt. 1, BK. IX, Ch. VII, Sec. I, p. 605) Indeed, according to P.R. Ganpathi Iyer's Law Relating to Hindu and Mahomedan Endowments, (2nd Edition, 1918, Chap. XVII, at p. 388) there has been no 'mosque' without a minaret after the first half century from the Flight."

(D) There was no arrangement for storage of water for Vazoo, and there were the Kasauti pillars with the figure of Hindu Gods inscribed on them and the Sandalwood beam. Such a place could never be a 'mosque'. (E) There is mention in the Fyzabad Gazetteer of the burial of 75 Muslims at the gate of the Janmasthan and the place being known as Ganj Shahidan, after the battle of 1855 between the Hindus and the Muslims in which the Hindus succeeded in resuming control over the premises, including the three-domed structure. There have been no graves anywhere near the building or its precincts or the area appurtenant thereto, or surrounding it, for the last more than 50 years at least, but if the building was surrounded by a grave-yard soon after the annexation of Avadh by the British, the building could not be a 'Mosque' and could not be used as a 'mosque', for the offering of prayers or Namaz, except the funeral prayers on the death of a person buried therein, that is, the Namaz-Janaz, is prohibited in a grave-yard according to the Muslim authorities."

3130. The defendant no.17 in his additional written statement has denied para 21-B and further says:

"....Muslim cannot use any open piece of land in question for offering prayers and they also cannot encroach upon the land of religious places of Hindus."
3131. Defendant no.20 has replied the relevant averments of the plaintiffs in respect to the above issues in para 2 and 41 of its written statement:

"2. That the contents of paragraph 2 of the plaint are absolutely wrong and denied. There has never been any battle between Emperor Babar and the previous Ruler of Ayodhya nor any grave yard or mosque as alleged has been built or dedicated by Emperor Babar."
"41. That the following facts also establish that the mosque in dispute has not been built by Babur at all in 1528 nor is a mosque at all:-
(1) The tomb of this disputed Masjid if it is to be looked from behind would show that it is not in the style developed by Turkis during fifteenth century, nor the Mehrab of the Masjid in that style is to be found. Thus there is no tomb in the disputed Masjid as is to be found in other mosques generally.
(2) On the north door in the front facing each other there are two tigers. They are in the style of taking leaps and their tails are just in the same style when a tiger takes the leap. Between these two tigers there is a peacock. This is not a characteristic of a mosque. (3) The various Hindu idols are painted or their scriptions are to be found in the disputed mosque. (4) In the disputed mosque there is no provision for reciting Namaz. To this day it has no minerettes, no place for storage of water for Vazoo.
(5) The Muslim Faith as adumbrated in Holy Koran does not permit the construction of a mosque on the site of temple after demolishing the temple. (6) Babur never dedicated the property of disputed mosque to ALLAH. Even supposing without admitting that Babur constructed the disputed mosque, yet as it has been done by committing trespass, demolishing the Temple, the abode of God, either by Babur or at his instance by Mir Baqi, the Governor of Oudh, the dedication is wholly invalid and void. The material of the old temple was largely employed in building the mosque and a few if the original columns are still in good preservation. They are of closed grained black stone (Kasauti) bearing various Hindi Bas-reliefs. The outer beam of the main structure being of sandal wood, the height of the columns is 7 to 8 ft., the shape of the base, the middle section and the capital is square, the rest being round or octagonal . . . . . Subsequently, Aurangjeb also desecrated the shrines of Ayodhya which led to prolonged bitterness between Hindus and Musalmans. Latter also occupied Janmasthan by force and also made an assault on Hanumangarhi. Attacks and counter attacks continued under the leadership of Maulvi Amir Ali (See page 352 of Faizabad Gazetteer 1960).
(7) A mosque must be built in a place of peace and quiet and near a place where there is a sizeable and large number of Muslim population. According to the Tenets of Islam, a mosque cannot be built at place which is surrounded on all sides by temples where the sound of music, of Conch shells or Ghanta Ghariyalis must always disturb the peace and quiet of the place. (8) A mosque must have minerette for calling the Ajan. According to Baille "When an assembly of worshippers pray in Masjid with permission, i.e. delivery. But it is a condition that prayers be with Ajan or the regular call and be public and not private, for though there should be an assembly yet if it is without Izah and the prayers are private instead of public, the place is no Masjid according to the true desciples."
Indeed there has been no mosque without a minerette after the first half century fight. (See P.R. Ganapati Iyer's law relating to Hindu and Muhammadan Endowments 2nd Edition 1918 Chapter XVII, page

388).

(9) According to the claim laid by the Muslims in the present suit, the building is surrounded on sides by a grave yard known as Ganj Shahidan. There is a mention in the Faizabad Gazetteer also of the burial of seventy five Muslims at the gate of Janmasthan and the place being known as Ganj Shahidan after the battle of 1855. Although there are no graves anywhere near the building at Sri Rama Janma Bhumi or in its precincts or the area appurtenant thereto for the last more than 50 years and if the building was surrounded by a graveyard during the British times soon after the annexation of Audh by them the building could not be mosque and could not be used as a mosque for offering of prayers except the funeral prayers."

3132. In the additional written statement, the defendant no.20 while denying para 21-B of the plaint, in para 2, has further said in para 5:

"That by destruction of the structure, the pillars were also destroyed which were evidence of Hindu Temple. It is not the destruction of Babri Mosque but a Hindu temple. The answering defendant No. 20 is entitled to claim the land in dispute for constructing a temple of Bhagwan Ram on the disputed land."
3133. Issue No.9 (suit 5) is as under:

"Was the disputed structure a mosque known as Babri Masjid?"
3134. The necessary pleadings relevant for the above issue are in para 24 of the plaint which are:

"That such a structure raised by the force of arms on land belongings to the Plaintiffs Deities, after destroying the ancient Temple situate thereat, with its materials including the Kasauti pillars with figures of Hindu gods carved thereon, could not be mosque and did not become one in spite of the attempts to treat it as a mosque during the British rule after the annexation of Avadh. Some salient points with regard thereto are noted below. (A) According to the Koran, ALLAH spoke to the Prophet thus--
" And fight for the religion of GOD against those who fight against you; but transgress not by attacking them first, for GOD loveth not the transgressors. And kill them wherever ye find them; and turn them out of that whereof they have dispossessed you; for temptation to idolatry is more grievous than slaughter, yet fight not against them in the holy temple, until they attack you therein; . . . . . . . ."
(B) According to all the Muslim authority and precedents and the decided cases also. ALLAH never accepts a dedication of property which does not belong to the Waqf that is, the person who purports to dedicate property to ALLAH for purposes recognised as pious or charitable, as waqf under the Muslim law. By his acts of trespass and violence for raising a mosque on the site of the Temple after destroying it by force, Mir Baqi committed a highly un-Islamic act. His attempts to convert the Temple into a mosque did not, therefore, create a valid dedication of property to ALLAH, whether in fact or in law, and it never became a mosque.

(C) That in spite of all that Mir Baqi tried to do with the Temple, the land always continued to vest in the Plaintiff Deities, and they never surrendered their possession over it. Their possession continued in fact and in law. The Asthan never went out of the possession of the Deity and HIS worshippers. They continued to worship HIM through such symbols as the CHARAN and Sita Rasoi, and the idol of BHAGWAN SRI RAMA LALA VIRAJMAN on the Chabutra, called the Rama Chabutra, within the enclosed courtyard of the building directly in front of the arched opening of its Southern dome. No one could enter the building except after passing through these places of Hindus worship. According to the Muslim religion and law there can be no Idol worship within the courtyard of a mosque and the passage to a mosque must be free and unobstructed and open at all times to the 'Faithful'. It can never be through a Hindu place of worship. There can be no co-sharing of title or possession with ALLAH in the case of a mosque. His possession must be exclusive. (D) A mosque must be built in a place of peace and quiet, but not to a place where there is a sizeable Muslim population, according to the tenets of Islam, and as insisted upon by it, a mosque cannot be built in a place which is surrounded on all sided by Temples, where the sound of music or conch shells or Ghanta Ghariyals must always disturb the peace and quiet of the place. (E) A mosque must have minaret for calling the Azan. According to Baillie. "When an assembly of worshippers pray in a masjid with permission, that is delivery. But it is a condition that the prayers be with izan. or the regular call, and be public not private, for though there should be an assembly yet if it is without izan. and the prayers are private instead of public, the place is no masjid. According to the two disciples." (Pt. I. BK. IX, Ch, VII Sec. i.p.

605). Indeed, there has been no mosque without a minaret after the first half century from the Flight. (See-P.R. Ganapati Iyer's Law relating to Hindu and Mahomedan Endowments, 2nd Edition, 1918. Chap. XVII, P. 388.) (F) According to the claim laid by the Muslims in their suit No. 12 of 1961, the building is surrounded on all sides by grave-yard known as 'Ganj Shahidan'. There is a mention in the Fyzabad Gazetteer also, quoted herein above, of the burial of 75 Muslims at the gate of the Janmasthan, and the place being known as Ganj Shahidan. After the battle of 1855. Although there are no graves anywhere near the building at Sri Rama Janma Bhumi, or in its precincts, or the area appurtenant thereto, for the last more than 50 years, if the building was surrounded by a grave-yard during the British times soon after the annexation of Avadh by them, the building could not be a mosque, and could not be used as a mosque, for the offering of prayers, except the funeral prayers on the death of a person buried therein, is prohibited in a grave-yard according to the Muslim authorities.

(G) As already stated, there is no arrangements for storage of water for Vazoo and there are the Kasauti pillars with the figures of Hindu Gods and Godesses inscribed thereon in the building."

3135. The defendant no.4 in para 24 has replied as under:

"That the contents of para 24 of the Plaint are also incorrect and hence denied as stated. At no point of time there ever existed any temple at the site of the Babri Masjid and it is absolutely incorrect to say that the said mosque was constructed, after destroying any ancient temple, with the material of the alleged temple. The mosque in question has always been used as a mosque since its construction during the regime of Emperor Babar.
The contents of the sub-paras (A) to (G) of the para under reply are also incorrect and the same are also denied as stated:
(A) : That the contents of para 24(A) of the plaint are also denied as stated. The quotation of Quran is totally out of context and the same is not even correct and complete. (B) That the contents of para 24(B) of the Plaint are also incorrect and hence denied as stated. The land in question undoubtedly belonged to the State when the mosque in question was constructed on behalf of the State and as such it cannot be said that it could not be dedicated for the purposes of the mosque. Emperor Babar was a Sunni Muslim and the vacant land on which the Babari Masjid was built lay in his territory and did not belong to anyone and it could very well be used by his officers for the purposes of the mosque and specially so when the Emperor Babar himself consented and gave approval for the construction of the said mosque. . . . . . (C) That the contents of para 24(C) of the Plaint are also absolutely false and incorrect and hence denied as stated. .
. . . . The alleged Ram Chabutra has also not remained in existence since the time of Babar but rather the same is the creation of around 1857 period.

It is also incorrect to say that the entry of the mosque could not be possible except after passing through any place of Hindu worship. The concept of the mosque has also been wrongly and incorrectly described in the para under reply.

(D) That the contents of para 24(D) of the Plaint are also incorrect and hence denied as stated. There is no such requirement for the construction of any mosque - that the same should be built in a place of peace and quiet and near to a place where there is a sizeable Muslim population. It is also incorrect to say that the mosque cannot be built in a place which is surrounded by temples, where the sound of music and Konch shell, Ghante Gharyal disturbs the peace and quiet of the place. (E) That the contents of para 24 (E) of the Plaint are also incorrect and hence denied as stated and in reply thereto it is submitted that there is no specific shape of building a mosque and there is no requirement of existence of any minarets for calling the Azan. The quotations given in the para under reply are also irrelevant and out of the context and the same do not even present a correct law. (F) That the contents of para 24 (F) of the Plaint are also incorrect and hence denied as stated. Whatever was mentioned in the Plaint of Suit No. 12 of 1961 would appear from the copy of the same and the averments of the Faizabad Gazetteer referred to in the para under reply are neither authentic and nor correct. It is also incorrect to say that there were no graves near the building of the said mosque. The fact is that many graves existing in the Ganj-Shaheedan have now been mostly demolished by the Bairagis and that is why they are not now visible. It is reiterated that the mosque is question has been offering regular 5 times prayers upto 22nd December, 1949 and even Friday prayers have been offered in the same till 16th December, 1949 and the Imam of the said mosque who used to lead the prayers even in 1949 namely Maulvi Abdul Ghaffar son of late Mohd Abdul Qadir. He had even filed his affidavit in writ No. 746 of 1986 : Mohd Hashim Vs. District Judge, Faizabad and others, which is still pending in this Court.

(G) That the contents of para 24 (G) of the Plaint are also incorrect and hence denied as stated and in reply thereto it is submitted that there is a pucca well also outside the mosque in question for taking water for the purpose of Vazoo."

3136. Defendant no.5 has denied para 24 of the plaint in para 24 of his written statement.

3137. In brief, the case of the plaintiffs (Suit 4) or the pro- mosque parties is that the building in dispute was constructed in 1528 AD at the command of Emperor Babar by his commander Mir Baqi, when Babar had conquered Hindustan. He dedicated the said building to Almighty and made it a public wakf. Since then it is being used for offering namaz by muslims in general. It is a public wakf and cannot be treated a Hindu temple. 3138. It is also said that the matter being almost 500 years old, one cannot be expected to adduce evidence to show the facts as to what occurred at that time or what actually existed or happened in 1528 AD, to demonstrate the manner in which waqf of disputed property was created. If the property in dispute has been used as mosque and Namaz has been offered therein, this itself is sufficient evidence to prove the building in dispute as mosque i.e. a waqf validly created. It is the evidence by "user" which must be taken into account by the Court to find out whether there existed waqf or not and whether the building in dispute was dedicated as waqf to God or not. Once there is a waqf, the building and site both belong to God and cannot be treated otherwise so as to change its nature, whether by placing idols or by offering worship etc. 3139. On the contrary, all the learned counsels for pro- temple parties (Hindus) supporting the case of Hindu temple contended that the disputed site itself is a place of specific significance for Hindus being the "birth place of Lord Rama", "an incarnation of Lord Vishnu". This place whether was occupied by Hindus or not but on its own is a "Deity" having been worshipped by Hindus for time immemorial and much earlier from the period when it is said that the disputed building was constructed. The site in dispute was not owned by any private individual but it belong to a Deity. Neither Babar nor Mir Baqi was owner of the property. There is nothing to show that they obtained or acquired this property by valid means i.e. gift, purchase, etc. In order to constitute a waqf in accordance with Shariyat law one of the crucial factor is that the land must belong to the Waqif. Neither Babar nor Mir Baqi were owner of the property in dispute therefore, had no occasion or right to create a waqf in accordance with Shariyat Law. Construction of a Muslim religious place on the place of another religion is not permitted and that too by demolishing a religious structure of another religion. There was not and cannot be a valid dedication to God. No question arose to create a valid waqf in accordance with Shariyat Law. Once a valid waqf was never created, the claim of the disputed building as a mosque, existing since 1528 AD, is wholly baseless and imaginary. In the absence of existence of a valid waqf, the mere fact that Muslims at some point of time offered Namaz in the disputed building, assuming though not admitting, would not make the same a waqf i.e. mosque (The factum that Namaz was offered in the disputed building is seriously disputed but the argument has been advanced in the alternative).

3140. Besides the documentary and oral evidence, a lot of precedents, judicial and religious literature and history books on the subject have been cited.

3141. In view of our findings recorded on the issues, whether the building in dispute was constructed in 1528 AD by Emperor Babar or any of his agent in negative, the issues in question immediately would also stand negatived. When the building in dispute itself was not constructed in 1528 AD by Babar or any of his agent, the question of creation of a waqf by dedication to Almighty by any of them would not arise. All these issues without any further discussion thus deserve to be answered against the pro-mosque parties. However, we shall consider these issues further on merits, presuming for the purpose of these issues only, at this stage, that the building in dispute, if constructed in 1528 AD by Babar or any of his officer under his dictates, whether it satisfy the requirement of a waqf, as is known in Sharii i.e. according to tenets of Islamic law or otherwise and other aspects involved in these issues. 3142. The first question, as would crop up immediately, is what is a waqf in law of Shariyat, how it can be created or could be created and what the religious sanctions are in this regard, as also the relevant judicial precedents, if any. 3143. Some aspects of the matter pertaining to waqf have already been discussed while considering the issues relating to U.P. Act 1936 and 1960 but there it was confined only to the extent, it was necessary for adjudication of those issues. Here the issues are simply related with Islamic law on waqf as also the power, privileges, obligations etc. of conqueror or a king or a emperor or an invader, as the case may be. 3144. The Islamic religious scriptures in this regard, relevant for our purposes, have been referred in sufficiently great detail by Sri P.N.Mishra, Advocate assisted by Ms. Ranjana Agnihotri counsel for defendant no.20 (Suit 4) and that itself give enough idea on this subject.

3145. Firstly, he submits that Islam guarantees religious freedom and tolerance. It does not permit usurpation of sacred religious places of others. There does not arise any question of a valid construction of a mosque at a place where a Hindu temple existed or a place which, for its peculiar nature and specific religious importance, very pious to the persons of another religion, i.e., Hindu. In this regard he referred Holy Quran, Hadith & several other books on islamic laws. 3146. The Holy Quran and the Holy prophet has commanded that no one should be compelled to change religion. Idolater should be allowed to worship in their own way. The Holy prophets have appeared in every community and they should not be compared but respected and a Muslim can maintain good relation with his Pagan (i.e. worshipper of multi- deities) relative.

3147. The Noble Qur'an, Surah-2 Al-Baqarah, Ayat 256 at P. 42 reads as follows:

"256. There is no compulsion in religion. Verily, the Right Path has become distinct from the wrong path. Whoever disbelieves in Taghut and believes in Allah, then he has grasped the most trustworthy handhold that will never break. And Allah is All-Hearer, All-Knower."
3148. The Holy Quran (The Noble Qur'an, Surah 109 Al-Kafirun, Ayat 1-6, page 603) permits people of other religion to carry out their religious practices according to their own religion. English translation of the said Ayat reads as follows:

"1. Say (O Muhammad .. .. .. to these Mushrikun and Kafirun): "O Al-Kafirun (disbelievers in Allâh, in His Oneness, in His Angels, in His Books, in His Messengers, in the Day of Resurrection, and in Al-Qadar)!
2. I worship not that which you worship,
3. Nor will you worship that which I worship.
4. And I shall not worship that which you are worshipping.
5. Nor will you worship that which I worship.
6.To you be your religion, and to me my religion (Islâmic Monotheism).
3149. The Holy Quran (The Noble Qur'an, Surah-10 Yunus, Ayat 47 at page 214) recognizes birth of Messengers of the Almighty in every community or nation. English translation of the said Ayat reads as follows:
"47. And for every Ummah (a community or a nation) there is a Messenger; when their Messenger comes, the matter will be judged between them with justice, and they will not be wronged."
3150. Sacred Compilation Hadith Sahih Bukhari 3.595 p. 610-611 reveals that Holy Prophet commanded not to give a Prophet superiority over another. Relevant portion of the said Hadith reads as follows:

"The Prophet said, "Do not give a prophet superiority over another, for on the Day of Resurrection all the people will fall unconscious and I will be the first to emerge from the earth, and will see Moses standing and holding one of the legs of the Throne. I will not know whether Moses has fallen unconscious or the first unconsciousness was sufficient for him."
3151. The Sacred Compilation Hadith Sahih Bukhari 4.407 reveals that Holy Prophet allowed a Muslim to keep good relation with his mother who was pagan i.e. idolater. The said Hadith reads as follows:

"Narrated Asma 'bint Abi Bakr: During the period of the peace treaty of Quraish with Allah's Apostle, my mother, accompanied by her father, came to visit me, and she was a pagan. I consulted Allah's Apostle, "O Allah's Apostle! My mother has come to me and she desires to receive a reward from me, shall I keep good relation with her?" He said, "Yes, keep good relation with her."
3152. Sri Mishra contended that freedom of religion and religious practices to Hindus during Islamic Rule was granted to the Hindus and they were not forced to be governed by Islamic Law.

3153. Law of Shar as interpreted by Great Imam Abu Haneef recognized right of freedom of religion & religious practices of the Hindus of India under Islamic Rulers. Sultan Sikandar Lodi was dissuaded by the Greatest Alim of that age Miyan Abdullah Ajodhani from demolishing a Hindu Temple & putting ban on religious practices of the Hindus. Even Emperor Aurangzeb who later on caused demolition of several Temples of the Hindus throughout his Empire, in his Firman dated 1659 admitted that Shariyat do not permit to demolish old Temples and impose restriction on performance of customary and other religious rituals of the Hindus.

3154. Ibn Battuta tells that Muhammad bin Tughlaq had granted permission to rebuild demolished Idol Temples to the King of China. During the reign of Caliphs, the people of other faith i.e. Zimmis were allowed to carry out processions, observe festivals, beat drums, erect places of worship & maintain images therein.

3155. In Waqiyat-i-Mutaqi written by Rizkulah Mutaqi (b. 1491-92 & d. 1581 A.D.), Tabkats I Akbari by Khwaja Nizamuddin Ahmad (completed in 1592-93 A.D.) and Tarikh- i-Shahi (completed in the beginning of Emperor Jahangir's reign) it has been narrated that once upon a time when Sultan Sikandar Lodi (1488-1517 A.D.) was the Crown prince and known as Nizam Khan, he sought opinion of Alims for the purpose of demolishing an ancient temple of Hindus at Thaneshwar and putting ban on Hindus from taking holy dip in the Sacred pond at Thaneshwar. Alims unanimously made a request to him for putting that question to Greatest Alim of the age Miyan Abdullah Ajodhani who was available at that place. On being asked, the Great Alim Abdullah Ajodhani replied that Shar does not permit destruction of ancient temple and prohibition of customary rites of the Hindus. From said answer Sikandar Lodi became very much annoyed and drew his sword inter alia stating that 'first I will kill you and thereafter attack Thaneshwar'. Then Alim fearlessly answered that 'everyone has to die on one day and when anyone goes near a tyrant then he does it knowing fully well that his death is certain. I am not worried about my life but I say that if you had nothing to do with Shar then there was no need to put this question to me but since you asked me that question of Shar I replied it in accordance with Shar'. In "Uttar Taimoorkalin Bharat Bhag.1" (History of the Part-Taimoor Sultans of Delhi, Part

1) pages 104, 228 and 322 narrates it as follows:

^^dq # {k s= ij vkdz e .k dh ;sk tuk ckY;koLFkk esa ,slk gqvk fd ,d ckj mlus dq#{ks= ij vkdze.k djuk fu'p; fd;kA bl fo"k; ij vkfyekssa dk er Kkr djus ds fy, mlus mUgsa ,d= fd;kA ml ;qx ds lcls cM+s vkfye ¼fe;ka vcnqYykg vtks/kuh Hkh mifLFkr FksA lHkh us mudh vksj ladsr fd;k fd] ^^budh mifLFkfr esa ge dqN Hkh ugha dg ldrsA^^ fe;ka futke us fe;ka vcnqYyk ls bl fo"k; esa iwNkA mUgksaus iwNk] ^^ogka D;k gksrk gS\^^ fe;ka futke us dgk fd] ^^ml LFkku ij izR;sd izns'k ls dkfQj ,d= gksdj Luku djrs gSaA^^ fe;ka vcnqYykg us iwNk fd] ^^;g izFkk dc ls py jgh gS\^^ 'kgtkns us dgk fd] ^^;g cM+h izkphu izFkk gSA^^ fe;ka vcnqYykg us iwNk fd] ^^vkids iwoZ eqlyeku ckn'kkgksa us bl lEcU/k esa D;k fd;k\^^ 'kgtkns us dgk fd] ^^blds iwoZ fdlh ckn'kkg us dqN Hkh ugha fd;kA^^ eqYyk us dgk fd] ^^bldk mRrjnkf;Ro mu yksxksa ij gSA iz k phu eaf nj dk s u"V djuk mfpr ugh aA ^^ fe;ka futke us #"V gksdj] dVkj fudky yh vkSj dgk fd] ^^loZizFke eSa rqEgkjh gR;k d#Waxk rnqijkUr ogka vkdze.k d#WaxkA^^ mUgksaus dgk fd] ^^lHkh ds fy, ejuk vfuok;Z gSA fcuk bZ'oj ds vkns'k ds dskbZ Hkh ugha ejrkA tc dksbZ Hkh O;fDr fdlh vR;kpkjh ds ikl tkrk gS rks vius fy, e`R;q fu'p; djds tkrk gSA tks dqN gksuk gS og gksxk fdUrq vkius eq>ls 'kjk dh leL;k ds fo"k; esa iz'u fd;k rks eSaus mldk mRrj fn;kA ;fn vkidks 'kjk dh fpUrk ugha gS rks iwNus dh dksbZ vko';drk ughaA^^ lqYrku us vius dzks/k dks jksdk vkSj dgk fd] ^^;fn vuqefr iznku dj nsrs rks dbZ gtkj dkfQjksa dks ujd igqWapk nsrk vkSj vf/kdak'k eqlyeku mlls ykHkkfUor gksrsA^^ fe;ka vCnqYykg us dgk fd] ^^eq>s tks dqN dguk Fkk eSaus dg fn;k] vc vki tkusaA^^ og njckj ls mB [kM+k gqvkA vU; vkfye yksx mlds lkFk py fn;sA efydqy myek vius LFkku ij [kM+s jgsA fe;ka futke us fdlh vU; vksj /;ku u fn;k vkSj dgk] ^^fe;ka vCnqYykg vki dHkh&dHkh eq>ls HksaV djrs jgsaA^^ ;g dg dj mUgsa fonk dj fn;kA ckY;koLFkk esa mldh ;g n'kk FkhA Fkkus' oj ds Luku ds fojk s/ k dk iz ; Ru mlus viuh ckY;koLFkk esa tc fd og 'kgtknk Fkk ;g lquk fd Fkkus'oj esa ,d dq.M gS] tgkWa fgUnw ,d= gksdj Luku djrs gSaA mlus vkfyeksa ls iwNk fd ^^blds fo"k; esa 'kjk dk D;k vkns'k gS\^^ mUgksaus mRrj fn;k fd ^^izkphu eafnjksa dks u"V djus dh vuqefr ugha gSA tc fd ml dq.M esa izkphu dky ls Luku djus dh izFkk pyh vk jgh gS] mlesa Luku dk fu"ks/k vkids fy, mfpr ughaA^^ 'kgtkns us dVkj fudky yh vkSj ml vkfye dh gR;k dk ladYi djrs gq, dgk fd] ^^rw dkfQjksa dk Ik{kikrh gSA^^ ml cqtqxZ us mRrj fn;k fd] ^^tks dqN 'kjk esa fy[kk gS mls eSa dgrk gwWa vkSj lR; ckr dgus esa dskbZ Hk; ughaA^^ 'kgtknk larq"V gks x;kA /kekZ U /krk ,d fnu mlus vkns'k fn;k fd ^^Fkkus'oj tkdj dqdZ{ks= ¼dq#{ks=½ dks feV~Vh ls ikV fn;k tk; vkSj og Hkwfe ogka ds /keZfu"B O;fDr;ksa dks otgs evk'k esa uki dj ns nh tk;A^^ ml dky dk efydqy myek ml LFkku ij mifLFkr FkkA mlus 'kgtkns ls iwNk] ^^ogka D;k gS\^^ mlus mRrj fn;k] ^^,d gkSt gS tgka 1000] 2000 dksl ls fgUnw yksx Luku gsrq vkrs gSaA^^ mlus iwNk] ^^dc ls ;g dk;Z izkjEHk gqvk\^^ 'kgtkns us dgk] ^^o"kksZ ls ;g fonvr py jgh gSA^^ efydqy myek us iqu% iwNk] ^^vkids iwoZ ds ckn'kkg bl fo"k; esa D;k djrs Fks\^^ mlus mRrj fn;k] ^^dqN ughaA^^ efydqy myek us dgk] ^^;g rqEgkjk mRrjnkf;Ro ugha dkj.k fd rqEgkjs iwoZ eqlyeku ckn'kkgksa us bl fo"k; esa dqN ugaha fd;k\^^ 'kgtknk bl ckr ls cM+k xje gqvkA mlus dgk] ^^bl dky¼31½ds vkfye cM+s fofp= izdkj ds gSaA^^ la{ksIk esa] ;qokoLFkk esa og bLyke dk bruk cM+k Ik{kikrh FkkAs^^ 3156. In his Farman/Manshur of Emperor Aurangzeb of 15th March, 1659 AD. has said that in accordance with the Sharia the ancient temples, are not to be destroyed as such there should be no interference in offering prayers in temples of the Hindus. In spite of the fact that subsequently this ruler himself caused demolition of several temples, in his Firman dated 1659 he has accepted that sharia neither permit to interfere with the worship of the Hindus nor allows to destroy their temples. 3157. Ibn Battuta who held the office of the Kazi of Delhi as also functioned as Mutawalli of the Mausoleum of Sultan Kutubuddin during the reign of Sultan Mahommed Bin Tughlaq has noted down that Sultan Mahommed Bin Tughlaq had granted permission to the King of China to rebuild the idol temples that were demolished by his army in Himalayan region subject to payment of Jizya. Page 214 of the book 'IBN BATTUTA Travels in Asia and Africa 1325-1354' translated and selected by H.A.R. Gibb (first published in 1929 reprinted in 2007 by Low Price Publications, Delhi) reads as follows:
The king of China had sent valuable gifts to the sultan, including a hundred slaves of both sexes, five hundred pieces of velvet and silk cloth, musk, jewelled garments and weapons, with a request that the sultan would permit him to rebuild the idol-temple which is near the mountains called Qarajil (Himalaya). It is in a place known as Samhal, to which the Chinese go on pilgrimage; the Muslim army in India had captured it, laid it in ruins and sacked it.' The sultan, on receiving this gift, wrote to the king saying that the request could not be granted by Islamic law, as permission to build a temple in the territories of the Muslims was granted only to those who paid a poll-tax; to which he added "If thou wilt pay the jizya we shall empower thee to build it. And peace be on those who follow the True Guidance."
3158. Syed Amir Ali in his book "The Spirit of Islam" (at p. 272) substantiate that the Islam itself has ever maintained the most complete tolerance in respect of religion and if any excesses was done, it was by the passions of the ruler, using religious element as a pretext. Relevant extract thereof is as under:
"If we separate the political necessity which has often spoken and acted in the name of religion, no faith is more tolerant than Islam to the followers of other creeds. "Reasons of State" have led a sovereign here and there to display a certain degree of intolerance, or to insist upon a certain uniformity of faith; but the system itself has ever maintained the most complete tolerance. Christians and Jews, as a rule, have never been molested in the exercise of their religion, or constrained to change their faith. If they are required to pay a special tax, it is in lieu of military service, and it is but right that those who enjoy the protection of the State should contribute in some shape to the public burdens. Towards the idolaters there was greater strictness in theory, but in practice the law was equally liberal. If at any time they were treated with harshness, the cause is to be found in the passions of the ruler or the population. The religious element was used only as a pretext."
3159. The 'Spirit of Islam' (at p. 273) records the facts that the Holy Prophet gave guarantee of freedom of religion to the Christians of Najran and the neighbouring territories, inter alia, stating that there would be no interference with the practice of their faith, monks would not be removed from their Monastery and no image would be destroyed. It says:
"Has any conquering race or Faith given to its subject nationalities a better guarantee than is to be found in the following words of the Prophet? "To (the Christians of) Najran and the neighbouring territories, the security of God and the pledge of His Prophet are extended for their lives, their religion, and their property--to the present as well as the absent and others besides; there shall be no interference with (the practice of) their faith or their observances; nor any change in their rights or privileges; no bishop, shall be removed from his bishopric; nor any monk from his monastery, nor any priest from his priesthood, and they shall continue to enjoy every thing great and small as heretofore; no image or cross shall be destroyed; they shall not oppress or be oppressed; they shall not practise the rights of blood-vengeance as in the Days of Ignorance; no tithes shall be levied from them nor shall they be required to furnish provisions for the troops." 3160. The 'Spirit of Islam' (at p. 273-274) records the facts that during the reign of Caliphs, the people of other faith i.e. Zimmis were allowed to carry out processions, observe festivals, beat drums, erect places of worship. Relevant extract of the said book reads as follows:
"After the subjugation of Hira, and as soon as the people had taken the oath of allegiance, Khalid bin-Walid issued a proclamation by which he guaranteed the lives, liberty and property of the Christians, and declared that "they shall not be prevented from beating their nakus and taking out their crosses on occasions of festivals." "And this declaration," says Imam Abu-Yusuf, "was approved of and sanctioned by the Caliph and his council."
The non-Moslem subjects were not precluded from building new churches or temples. Only in places exclusively inhabited by Moslems a rule of this kind existed in theory. "No new Church or temple," said Abdullah bin Abbas, "can be erected in a town solely inhabited by Moslems: but in other places where there are already Zimmis inhabiting from before, we must abide by our contract with them."
...
The best testimony to the toleration of the early Moslem government is furnished by the Christians themselves. In the reign of Osman (the third Caliph), the Christian Patriarch of Merv addressed the Bishop of Fars, named Simeon, in the following terms: "The Arabs who have been given by God the kingdom (of the earth) do not attack the Christian faith; on the contrary they help us in our religion; they respect our God and our Saints, and bestow gifts on our churches and monasteries." 3161. Sri Mishra submitted that idolater Hindus were recognised as Zimmis by the Great Imam Abu Haneef. Since Empeor Babar was follower of Imam Abu Hanif's school, had no right to erect mosque over a Hindu shrine. Hindus were recognized as Jimmis in 712 AD by the Great Imam Abu Haneef by virtue of authorities conferred upon the Doctors of Islam by Hadiths for the purpose of showing the people right path on the basis of correct interpretation of Law of Shar. Mahomed Kasim Feristha in his book "Tarikhe Feristha" records that in reply to a question of Sultan Allaooddeen Khiljy, Kaji Mugdis answered him that the Hindus were granted status of Jimmi by the Great Imam Abu Huneef. Sri Mishra quoted page 198 of the English Translation of "History of the rise of the Mahomedan Power in India till the year AD 1612" translated by John Briggs (first published in 1829 reprinted in 2006 by Low Price Publications, Delhi) which reads as follows:
"First question. "From what description of Hindoos is it lawful to exact obedience and tribute?"--Answer. "It is lawful to exact obedience and tribute from all infidels, and they can only be considered as obedient who pay the poll- tax and tribute without demur, even should it be obtained by force; for, according to the law of the Prophet, it is written, regarding infidels, 'Tax them to the extent that they can pay, or utterly destroy them.' The learned of the faith have also enjoined the followers of Islam. 'To slay them, or to convert them to the faith;' a maxim conveyed in the words of the Prophet himself. The Imam Huneef, however, subsequently considers that the poll-tax, or as heavy a tribute imposed upon them as they can bear, may be substituted for death, and he has accordingly forbidden that their blood should be heedlessly spilt. So that it is commanded that the Juzeea (poll-tax) and Khiraj (tribute) should be exacted to the uttermost farthing from them, in order that the punishment may approximate as nearly as possible to death."
3162. In 712 AD Imam Abu Hanifah recognised the Hindus of Sind and Multan as Jimmis. 'The Mughal Empire' edited by Sri R.C. Majumdar (3rd Edn. 1990 published by Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, Bombay) at page 538 reads as follows:
In 712 A.D. Muhammad bin Qasim, the conqueror of Sind, accorded the Hindus of Sind and Multan the status of zimmis which was the special privilege of Christians and Jews, the famous Muslim Jurist, Abu Hanifah, recognised this enactment as legal.
3163. It is contended that the Sacred Compilation Jami' At-Tirmidhi (Vol.-5) Hadith 2681, 2682 & 2685 reveal that a learned jurist is greater than a thousand worshippers. Commentator explains that as a learned jurist does not only correct himself and is safe from the illusion of the Saitan, but also he protects others against the plots, conspiracies and errors of the devil and he guides them correctly by teaching the issues of religion. He is superior than a dedicated worshipper who lacks firm knowledge, the benefit of his worship is restricted to his own self, and also it is easy for the Satan to misguide him. From the said Hadith it can be inferred that superiority to the learned jurist has been given only for the purpose to tell the people what is right or wrong according to religion. Said Hadiths read as follows:
"2681. Ibn Abbas narrated that the Messenger of Allah said: "The Faqih is harder on Ash-Shaitan than a thousand worshippers." (Da'if) Comments:
A dedicated worshipper who does not have firm knowledge, the benefit of his worship is restricted to his own self, and also it is easy for the Satan to misguide him; while a learned jurist does not only correct himself and is safe for the illusion of the Satan, but also he protects others against the plots, conspiracy and errors of the devil and he guides them correctly by teaching the issues of religion. 2682. Qais bin Kathir said: "A man from Al-Madhinah came to Abu Ad-Darda when he was in Dimashq. So he said: "What brings you O my nephew? he replied: 'A Hadith has reached me which you have narrated from the Messenger of Allah'. he said: 'You did not come for some need?' He said: 'No'. He said: 'Did you come for trade?' He said: 'No, I did not come except seeking this Hadith'. So he said: 'Indeed, I heard the Messenger of Allah saying: 'Whoever takes a path upon which he seeks knowledge, then Allah makes a path to Paradise easy for him. And indeed the angels lower their wings in approval of the one seeking knowledge. Indeed forgiveness is sought for the knowledgeable one by whomever is in the heavens and whomever is in the earth, even the fish in the waters. And superiority of the scholar over the worshipper is like the superiority of the moon over the rest of the celestial bodies. Indeed the scholars are the heirs of the Prophets, and the Prophets do not leave behind Dinar or Dirham. The only legacy of the scholars is knowledge, so whoever takes from it, then he has indeed taken the most able share. (Da'if) 2685. Abu Umamah Al-Bahili narrated: "Two men were mentioned before the Messenger of Allah. One of them a worshipper, and the other a scholar. So, the messenger of Allah said: "The superiority of the scholar over the worshipper is like my superiority over the least of you.' Then the Messenger of Allah said: 'Indeed Allah, His angels, the inhabitants of the heavens and the earths - even the ant in his hole, even the fish - say Sulat upon the one who teaches the people to do good." (Hasan)" 3164. Sri Mishra explained the concept of "Jeziyah" and contended that freedom of religion was subject to payment of Jeziyah. As the Hindus were paying the said tax which was in the nature of a protection tax, it was the duty of Islamic Rulers and army of Islam to protect religious Hindu shrine and life of Hindus. he elaborated the above submission in multifold ways. 3165. The Divine Law of Shar contained in Holy Quran and Hadiths guarantees freedom of religion and religious practices to the Jimmis/ Dhimmiz (protectees) who pay jizya (a tax taken from the non-Muslims who are in the protection of the Muslim government). There were 20 conditions of Jeziyah one of which permits Muslim traveller to stay in Jimmis' temple while other permits them to stay in Jimmis' home for three days. These terms and condition were in practice which is very much apparent from the disclosure of Ibn Battuta that he stayed in the house of an old lady who was a Jimmy as in the city there was only one House of the Governor. Riyazu-S-Salatin, A History of Bengal on its page 67 has recorded the fact that Bakhtiyar Khilaji stayed in a temple within the territory of Kamrup Kingdom during his retreat from Tibbat campaign without harming the Temple.
3166. Sacred Compilation Hadith Sahih Bukhari 4.386 p. 836-837 reveals that the Holy Prophet's command was for the Muslim army to fight against the persons of other faith till they worship Allah alone or agree to pay jizya. It say:
"Our Prophet, the Messenger of our Lord, has ordered us to fight you till you worship Allah Alone or give Jizya (i.e. tribute); and our Prophet has informed us that our Lord says:-"Whoever amongst us is killed (i.e. martyred), shall go to Paradise to lead such a luxurious life as he has never seen, and whoever amongst us remain alive, shall become your master."
3167. The Sacred Compilation Hadith Sahih Bukhari 4.404 p. 843-844 reveals that asylum to non-Muslims living in Muslim territory was granted by Allah and His Holy Apostle.
Relevant extract of the said Hadith reads as follows:

". . . Narrated said: Abu Huraira once said (to the people), "What will your state be when you can get no Dinar or Dirhan (i.e. taxes from the Dhimmis)?" on that someone asked him, "What makes you know that this state will take place, O Abu- Huraira?" He said, "By Him in Whose Hands Abu Huraira's life is, I know it through the statement of the true and truly inspired one (i.e. the Prophet). "The people asked, "What does the Statement say?" He replied, "Allah and His Apostle's asylum granted to Dhimis, i.e non-Muslims living in a Muslim territory) will be outraged, and so Allah will make the hearts of those Dhimmis so daring that they will refuse to pay the Jizya they will be supposed to pay."
3168. Sacred Compilation Hadith Sahih Muslim (Vol. III) Hadith 1731R1 p. 180-181 reveals that when Holy Prophet appointed anyone as commander of an army he specially commanded them to invite the enemies who are polytheists to three course of action and if they respond anyone of these the commander must accept it and keep from doing them any harm. Out of three options one was to demand Jizya from the people who refused to accept Islam and if they agree to pay no harm should be done to them. The said Hadith reads as follows:

"(1731R1) It has been reported from Sulaiman b. Buraid through his father that when the Messenger of Allah (may peace be upon him) appointed anyone as leader of an army or detachment he would especially exhort him to fear Allah and to be good to the Muslims who were with him. He would say: Fight in the name of Allah and in the way of Allah. Fight against those who disbelieve in Allah. Make a holy war; do not embezzle the spoils; do not break your pledge; and do not mutilate (the dead) bodies; do not kill the children. When you meet your enemies who are polytheists, invite them to three courses of action. If they respond to any one of these, you also accept it and keep from doing them any harm. Invite them to (accept) Islam; if they respond to you, accept it from them and desist from fighting against them. Then invite them to migrate from their lands to the land of Muhajirs and inform them that, if they do so, they shall have all the privileges and obligations of the Muhajirs. If they refuse to migrate, tell them that they will have the status of Bedouin Muslims and will be subjected to the Commands of Allah like other Muslims, but they will not get any share from the spoils of
================================================================================


################################################################################
                      CATEGORY 4: PROPERTY DISPUTES
                              (5 CASES)
################################################################################

================================================================================
CASE 16:
[Cites 17, Cited by 3]
Bombay High Court
Mrs. Jyoti S. Doshi vs M/S Hindustan Hosiery Mills on 2 May, 2000
Equivalent citations: AIR2000BOM474, 2000(3)BOMCR813, (2000)3BOMLR408, 2000(4)MHLJ228, AIR 2000 BOMBAY 474, (2000) 4 ALLMR 389 (BOM), (2000) 4 MAH LJ 228, (2000) 3 BOM CR 813, 2000 (3) BOM LR 408, 2000 BOM LR 3 408
Author: H.L. Gokhale
Bench: H.L. Gokhale
ORDER
 

H.L. Gokhale, J.
 

1. The plaintiff herein, a woman litigant, has filed this summary suit for recovering the amount advanced by way of a loan to the defendant company. The plaintiff has sought a decree for the sum of Rs.

1,06,375/- together with interest at the rate of 18% per annum on the principal claim of Rs. 70,000/- from the date of filing of the suit till payment and/or realization. The plaintiff has not paid any Court fee on the plaint and it is averred in para 12 of the plaint as follows :-

'The plaintiff being a female litigant in the present suit is exempted from payment of Court fees and hence no Court fees have been paid."
This suit has been lodged on 3rd April 1998 and the plaintiff is seeking to proceed with the suit without payment of the Court fees in view of the then prevailing Notification dated 1st October 1994 issued by the Government of Maharashtra invoking the powers conferred under section 46 of the Bombay Court Fees Act, 1959 remitting the fees payable by women litigants in certain circumstances.
2. The suit was duly numbered without payment of Court fees. After service of the Writ of Summons on the defendant, appearance was filed on their behalf. Hence summons for judgment has been taken out by the plaintiff. Thereafter the matter came up before my brother Lodha, J., on 9th February 2000. During the course of the hearing before the learned Judge, objection was raised on behalf of the defendants that this suit is essentially concerning a commercial transaction and the notification would not apply to it. Thus, as recorded by the learned Judge in his order passed on that date, during the course of the argument the question cropped up as to whether the plaintiff is exempted from payment of Court fees under the Notification dated 1st October 1994 with respect to the summary suit filed by her under Order XXXVII, Rule 2 of Code of Civil Procedure. The learned Judge was of the view that to appreciate the question in its right perspective, it would be desirable that the Advocate General is also heard. Accordingly he directed a notice to be issued to the Advocate General for his appearance on the next date.

3. During the course of the hearing before my brother Lodha, J., an affidavit was filed on behalf of the State Government by one Shri P.G. Chhatre. Under Secretary to the Government, Revenue and Forest Department affirmed on 1st March, 2000. In that affidavit, the Under Secretary made a reference to the policy for women framed by the Government of Maharashtra in the year 1994. Thereafter in paragraphs 2, 3 and 4, the officer stated as follows :-

"2. I say that under the said policy for women the Government was concerned with women's access to property both at the matrimonial and maternal home. I say that the Government was also concerned with selves in unequal, unhappy and violent relationships. I say that for these purposes the Government enunciated various steps to assist women one of which was regarding exemption for such women litigants regarding payment of Court Fees.
3. I further respectfully submit that the said notification dated 1st October, 1994 must be construed with reference to the object sought to be achieved in pursuance of the said policy.
4. I say that the expression property in the said notification must be limited to the property of the matrimonial and maternal homes of the women."
4. As can be seen from the above referred affidavit on behalf of the State Government, the Government took a stand that the expression "property" in the said Notification must be limited to the property of matrimonial and ma-

ternal homes of the women. Thereafter to put the issue beyond any controversy, the State Government came out with another Notification on 23rd March 2000 adding an explanation to the earlier Notification issued on 1st October 1994 clarifying that 'the property disputes will mean property disputes arising out of and concerning matrimonial matters'. To put the issue in right perspective, it is desirable to reproduce the earlier Notification and the amending Notification. The earlier Notification dated 1st October, 1994 reads as follows:-

"REVENUE AND FORESTS DEPARTMENT Mantrataya, Bombay 400 032, dated 1st October 1994 BOMBAY COURT FEES ACT, 1959.
No. STP. 1094/CR-859/M-1.---Whereas, the Government of Mahar-ashtra has recently announced a policy with a view to promote the welfare of the women;
And whereas, the same welfare policy for women inter alia, provides for exemption of Court fees for women litigants in cases relating to maintenance, property right, violence and divorce;
And whereas, section 46 of the Bombay Court Fees Act, 1959 (Bom, XXXVI of 1959), empowers the State Government by notification in the Official Gazette to reduce or to permit any of the fees mentioned in the First and Second Schedules to that Act;
Now, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by section 46 of the Bombay Court Fees Act, 1959 (Bom. XXXVI of 1959), the Government of Maharashtra hereby remits the fees payable by women litigants on any of the plaints, applications, petitions. Memorandum of appeals or any other documents specified in the First and Second Schedules to the said Act, to be filled in any Civil, Family or Criminal Courts in respect of the cases relating to (a) maintenance, (b) property disputes, (c) violence and (d) divorce.
By order and in the name of the Governor of Maharashtra.
HARSHAWARDHAN GAJBHIYE   Deputy Secretary to Government"
5. The amending Notification reads as follows:-

"REVENUE AND FORESTS DEPARTMENT Mantralaya, Bombay 400 032, dated 23rd March 2000 BOMBAY COURT FEES ACT, 1959.
No. S.30/2000/673/CR-199/M-1.---in exercise of the powers conferred by section 46 of the Bombay Court Fees Act, 1959 (Bom. XXXVI of 1959), the Government of Maharashtra hereby amends the Government Notification, Revenue and Forests Department No. STP. 1094/CR-859/M-1 dated the 1st October 1994, as follows :-
In the said Notification, the following Explanation shall be added at the end, namely:-
" Explanation.-The expression "property disputes" shall mean property disputes arising out of and concerning matrimonial matters."
By order and in the name of the Governor of Maharashtra.

P.O. CHHATRE               Under Secretary to Government"

6. Now, it so happened that during the time the matter was pending before my brother Lodha, J., i.e. since February 2000, in all such matters where the office of the Prothonotary had any doubts, it kept such matters in abeyance without numbering them. Thus a number of plaints filed by women litigants falling in different categories such as summary suits and suits seeking specific performance have been kept under objection to await the clarification from the Court in this behalf.

7. Thereafter by change of assignment, the matter came up before me. A number of Advocates sought to intervene and make their submissions with respect to issues involved in this matter. The plaintiff's Advocate had taken discharge in the meanwhile and hence the plaintiff was appearing in person, but a number of advocates appeared to espouse the cause that was canvassed by the plaintiff. Mr. Halvasia appeared for the defendant and the learned Advocate General Mr. Vahanvati with Mr. Utangale, A.G.P. have appeared for the State Government. It was accepted by all concerned that as far as the Notification dated 23rd March 2000 is concerned, it would not apply retrospectively, meaning that the amending Notification will be effective from the date of the Notification. The result will be that from the date of the Notification, the term "property disputes" will be confined to the property disputes arising out of and concerning matrimonial matters only. (This will of course be subject to the challenge to this Notification, if any.) Thus the suits such as those involving commercial causes and specific performance filed on and after 23rd March, 2000 would not be eligible for exemption from Court fees. The question however came up with respect to the suits which were filed prior thereto and which were not numbered. It was canvassed by the Counsel for the defendant in this suit that the new notification only explains the import of the earlier notification and such suits were never covered thereunder. As against that, it was canvassed by the Counsel for women litigants that whether you look at the controversy from the point of view of Government's policy for women or the wording of the notification, the "property disputes" were eligible for exemption. Suits of different types were given exemption all these years under the notification of 1st October, 1994. The same approach has to be adopted to all the matters pending prior to the notification of 23rd March 2000. In view of these submissions, a general notice was issued to the advocates and parties appearing in person permitting them to make their submissions in this matter on the following two issues:-

(1) What is the scope and applicability of the exemption Notification dated October 1, 1994 bearing No. S.T.P 1994/CR/859/M-1 ?
(2) Whether the said Notification dated 23rd March 2000 can in any way restrict and/or govern and/or control the exemption granted earlier by Notification dated 1st October 1994 with regard to payment of Court Fees by women litigations ?
8. Thus the controversy was as to what was the connotation of the phrase "property disputes" as it stood in the unamended Notification of 1st October, 1994. Ms. Rajni Iyer, Ms. Uma Shah, Ms. Dipti Nazareth, Mr. Nair and Mr. Grover have appeared for various plaintiffs to canvass that the term "property dispute" as it existed in the unamended Notification covered alt types of property disputes which were espoused by women litigants, whereas Mr. Halvasia, learned Counsel for the defendant, contended that the term "property dispute" will have to be restricted to the disputes which arise out of and which are concerning matrimonial matters only. In his submission, though the amending Notification may not apply retrospectively, it was explaining the meaning of the term as it existed. That being so, in his submission the term could not be read in a wider sense. He submitted that the policy for women has to be looked into to understand the purpose for which the Notification had came to be issued initially on 1st October, 1994. It was made for women in distress. It was meant for their disputes concerning maintenance, violence and divorce and it was in that context that the term "property dispute" had been inserted along with the other terms. On the other hand, Mr. Iyer and the other advocates appearing for the plaintiffs supporting wider interpretation submitted that whether the policy is looked into or whether the term "property disputes" is looked at independently, in either of the situations all types of property disputes will have to be covered under the Notification.

9. In this context, while dealing with these two issues, there was one very important aspect which had to be borne in mind, namely that whereas the earlier Notification was issued way back on 1st October, 1994, the new Notification has been issued 5 years and 5 months after the earlier Notification. In the meanwhile, the Notification has come to be pressed into service by a number of women litigants and the same has been considered in number of judgments/orders passed by various judges of this Court. The Counsel on both the sides as well as the learned Advocate General took me through the various judgments whether reported or unreported. The judgments/orders which have been brought to my notice are the following: -

(1) Deepa v. State of Maharashtra , decided on 19th September 1995 by my brother A.P. Shah, J. That was a matter wherein the plaintiff had filed a suit for specific performance and had sought exemption from payment of Court fees under the Notification of 1st October, 1994. Since the Trial Court declined to grant exemption on the very ground that the suit was for specific performance and that it was not covered by First and Second Schedule to the Act, the plaintiff had filed a writ petition invoking Article 227 of the Constitution. The learned Judge took a view that the suit for specific performance would be covered under Article 7 of the First Schedule and therefore entertained the petition and granted the exemption as sougth.
(2) Testamentary Petition No. 284 of 1996 decided on 26th June 1996 by K.G. Shah, J., (unreported). This was a matter where a widow being a sole executrix under the last Will of her husband had filed the testamentary petition. She had not paid the Court fees on the probate petition. It was submitted on her behalf that under section 46 of the Bombay Court Fees Act, the State Government had come out with an exemption Notification covering property disputes. The office of the Prothonotary took the view that the Notification would not apply to her petition. Therefore, to have a judicial decision on the question, the matter had been placed before the Court. The learned Judge also issued a notice calling upon all concerned to have their say in the matter and Assistant Government Pleader appeared on behalf of the State and Superintendent of Stamps- After hearing all concerned, the learned Judge observed as follows in paragraph 16:--
"There is no indication anywhere in the notification showing that the notification is not intended to apply in relation to the applications or petitions for probate or letters of administration. There is no indication therein to show that it does not apply in relation to the applications for succession certificate."
The contrary argument canvassed by the learned Assistant Government pleader was recorded by the learned Judge in paragraph 19 and be rejected the same. The learned Judge accordingly held that the petitioner was not required to pay any Court fees in relation to the probate petition.

(3) Sanjay v. Vrishali Sanjay Jain, decided by Sirpurkar, J. on 19th March, 1997. This was a matter where in a petition for restitution of conjugal rights filed by the husband, his wife had filed a counter-claim seeking damages of Rs. 5 lakhs for mental torture. The Trial Court had permitted the counterclaim to be raised without payment of Court fees. The order of the Trial . Court was challenged in revision by the husband contending that the Notification was not applicable to the Counter-claim filed by the wife. The learned Judge held that the adverb "relating to" used prior to the four subjects covered under the Notification will have to be read in proper perspective. He took the view that the claim of the wife therefore seeking damages for mental torture would fall under the phrase "relating to violence" and therefore upheld the order of the Trial Court exempting her from payment of Court fees under the Notification of 1st October, 1994.

(4) Pankuwarbai Mutha v. Rameshchandra Mutha, decided by Vagyani J., on 27th August, 1997. This was a matter wherein the petitioner had applied for issuance of a succession certificate. The Trial Court insisted on payment of Court fees before the issuance of the certificate and hence the petitioner had come to the High Court in Civil Revision Application. The petitioner relied upon the judgment of A.P. Shah, J., (supra) and contended that Court fee would be exempted. The Civil Judge, Senior Division had taken a view that the phrase "property dispute" will cover only dispute pertaining to immovable property. Vagyani, J., took the view that such an interpretation was too narrow and too technical. He therefore entertained the Revision filed by the petitioner and exempted her from payment of Court fees.

(5) Parwatibai v. State of Maharashtra, , decided by Vagyani, J., on 24th October, 1997. This was a matter wherein the petitioner was denied exemption from payment of Court fees in a motor accident claim. She had therefore filed a Civil Revision against the decision of the Motor Accident Tribunal. The learned Judge took the view that the Notification of 1st October, 1994 applies to the disputes pertaining to both movable and immovable properties. That apart, he also took the view that under Rules 257(3) of the Maharashtra Motor Vehicles Rules, the Motor Accident Tribunal had the power to grant such an exemption. He therefore en-

tertained the Revision and granted the petitioner the benefit of exemption from payment of Court fees.

(6) Manjula Thdkkar v. Shivshakti Enterprises, , decided by Lodha, J., on 18th February, 1998. This was a writ petition wherein the petitioner had filed a summary suit without paying the advalorem Court fee. The Trial Court declined to grant her exemption and hence she had filed a writ petition. The petitioner relied upon the above referred judgment of A.P. Shah, J., in the case of Deepa v. State of Maharashtra (supra). On behalf of the State, the proposition canvassed by the petitioner was not disputed. In paragraph 8 of the order, it is recorded as follows:-

"The learned Assistant Government Pleader fairly concedes that in view of the aforesaid legal position, the petitioner is not liable to pay advalorem Court fee in Summary Suit No. 2486 of 1997."
The learned Judge therefore allowed the petition and directed that the petitioner was not liable to pay the advalorem Court fee as required by the Trial Court.

(7) Ashabai v. Ex.Engineer, M.S.E.B, decided by Palkar, J., on 29th July, 1998. That was a suit filed by a woman litigant claiming compensation for death of her husband due to electric shock. The learned Judge took the view that property disputes do not include tortious liability.

(8) Appeal (Lodging) No. 1254 of 1999 in Suit No. 198 of 1981 decided by Y.K. Sabharwal, C.J. (as he then was in this Court) and Radhakrishnan, J., on 9th April, 1999 (unreported). That was an appeal which was directed against an ex parte decree passed against all the defendants in the suit jointly and severally. The suit had been filed in the year 1981. Though initially the defendants had filed written statement, subsequently they absented themselves resulting into an ex parte decree. The notice of motion to set aside that decree had failed. Thereafter execution proceedings were taken out. The husband of the appellant had filed an SLP which also came to be dismissed while permitting the parties to file an appeal on merits. The appeal fifed by the company and one of its directors had been dismissed. It was at that stage that the lady appellant who was one of the directors of the company had filed the above referred appeal and had sought exemption from payment of Court fees. The Division Bench referred to the above referred Notification of 1994 and then observed in paragraph 2 of the judgment as follows:-

"A bare reading of the aforesaid Notification shows that it is issued with a view to promote the welfare of the women and protect them in litigation relating to maintenance, property disputes, violence and divorce. It is evident from the Notification that it has no applicability to the litigation of the present nature which has been filed by the Bank against the principal debtors and Directors. The decision of the learned Single Judge in the case of Parvatibai w/o Vijaydas v. State of Mahamshtra, 1998(2) Mh.L.J. 73, relied upon by the learned Counsel for the appellant has no applicability to the litigation of the present nature. Therefore we are of the view that the appellant is not entitled to exemption for payment of Court fee under the Notification reproduced above."
Thus the Appeal Court took the view that the Notification had no applicability to the litigation which was there before the Court filed by the Bank against the Principal debtor company and its directors. The Court had therefore taken the view that the appellant was not entitled to the exemption of the Court fees under the Notification.

(9) In Re : Vidya Shivajirao Pati, reported in A.I.R. 1999 Bombay 318, decided by me on 28th April 1999. This was a matter wherein the petitioner, a grand mother of a male child, had sought letters of administration to the property, assets and credits of her daughter for the benefit of her grand son. On the strength of being a woman litigant, she had sought exemption from payment of Court fees. This was a case wherein the grand father of the child was also available who could have filed the petition and hence taking a view that the revenue should not suffer unnecessarily, I directed that the petitioner will have to pay the necessary Court fees on the petition. There were two other petitions along with this petition which also came to be decided under that order. In those two other matters, to the extent the ladies were beneficiaries they were granted exemption from payment of Court fees under the Notification, whereas to the extent the beneficiaries were male members they were required to pay the Court fees to that extent.

(10) Testamentary Petition Nos. 346 of 1998 and 576 of 1999 decided by Nijjar J., on 10th February 2000. In both these matters, Nijjar J., has taken the view that to the extent the ladies are claiming a share in the property they will be exempt from the requirement of Court fees (taking a view similar to the one which 1 have taken in A.I.R. 1999 Bombay 318) while at the same time charging the Court fees from the male litigants.

10. Prom the above referred different judgments and orders passed by various Judges, what emerges is as follows:-

(a) In a suit for specific performance, a learned Judge has taken a view that the Court fees would not be payable if the suit is filed by a lady litigant. That judgment has been rendered as back as on 19th September 1995.
(b) In matters of probate petition and similar proceedings also, the lady litigants have been exempted from the requirement of payment of Court fees to the extent they are the beneficiaries in the property which has been the view taken by me on 28th April 1999 and the same approach has been continued by another Judge (Nijjar J.).
(c) In matters of mental torture, a counter-claim by a lady litigant has been entertained without payment of Court fees by an order passed on 19th March 1997.
(d) In a matter of motor accident claim, though invoking provisions of Rule 257(3) of the Maharashtra Motor Vehicles Rules, a learned Judge has taken a view that property will include immovable as well as movable and exempted a lady litigant from payment of Court fees by an order passed on 24th October 1997.
(e) In a summary suit, a learned Judge has taken a view on 18th February 1998 that Court fees would not be payable (though that was also on the footing of the Assistant Government Pleader conceding to that position).
Thus we have judgments covering different facets of property disputes such as suits for specific performance, summary suits, claims to the Motor Accident Tribunal, claims seeking compensation for mental torture and probate petition and application for succession certificate, which have all held women litigants to be exempt from Court fees. All these judgments and orders have been given during this intervening period and have remained and are being followed in different courts including this Court whenever such controver- sies are coming before the Court. There are two judgments taking a different view. One given by the Appeal Court in a bank suit wherein a lady director sought exemption from Court fees. In an appeal filed by her, the Division Bench has taken the view that she would not be eligible to claim exemption from payment of Court fees. And in a suit claiming compensation another Judge has taken a view that property dispute does not include tortious liability.

11. Mrs. Shah, learned Counsel appearing for one of the intervenors, submitted that it has been the policy of the Court to avoid reopening of settled issues which is from the point of view of preventing multiplicity of proceedings. She submitted that merely because now a new Notification has come, the matters, which are pending before the Prothonotary under objection, could not be considered under the new Notification. She submitted that all these judgments and orders have been accepted and implemented. That being the position, the Notification now issued ought to be implemented pro-spectively and by no manner it should be given any retrospective effect. She relied upon a passage from the Judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Baburam v. C.C. Jacob, , which states in paragraph 5 as follows :

"The prospective declaration of law is a devise innovated by the Apex Court to avoid reopening of settled issues and to prevent multiplicity of proceedings. It is also a devise adopted to avoid uncertainty and avoidable litigation. By the very object of prospective declaration of law, it is deemed that all actions taken contrary to the declaration of law prior to its date of declaration are validated. This is done in the larger public interest. Therefore, the subordinate forums which are legally bound to apply the declaration of law made by this Court are also duty-bound to apply such dictum to cases which would arise in future only. In matters where decisions opposed to the said principle have been taken prior to such declaration of law cannot be interfered with on the basis of such declaration of law."
12. Ms. Iyer, learned Counsel appearing for another lady litigant, drew my attention to various provisions of the "Policy for Women" announced by the State Government in June 1994 which led to the Notification of 1994. She pointed out that in Chapter II giving the background material, it was stated in Clause 2.2 that the approach towards women so far was coloured by the welfare orientation where women were seen as an object of State manificence rather than as participants in the development process. Thereafter it is stated in the policy that it was only in the 1970s that the shift in approach from welfare to development has slowly emerged. She also referred to Clause 4.1.1 which states that the strategy of the State now is to give this empowerment for the purposes of devolution of control over economic infrastructure. She also drew my attention to Clause 4.1.4 which provides that when it comes to slum identity cards, housing allotments or land grants, all such grants by the Government hereafter will have to be in the names of husband and wife. Then she drew my attention to the steps taken by the Government in the field of law and mainly Clause 8.5.1 which refers to the amendment to the Hindu Succession Act with reference to its application to the State of Maharashtra to give coparcenary rights to women. She therefore submitted that the term "property" appearing in Clause 8.5.8 even if one looks at it from the point of view of policy, the same will have to be broadly construed. She submitted that the term "property" will have to be considered as an area covering all aspects of property which was also an object manifest in the policy for women.

13. Mr. Grover, learned Counsel appearing for one of the intervenors - a lady litigant, submitted that the entries in Clause 8.5.8 could not be read only in the context of Clause 8.4 as was being suggested by the defendant. In his submission, Clause 8.4 was only one of the facets of the policy. To say that only the disputes with respect to matrimonial properties would be covered, would be denying the benefits to the women litigants who had not been married and who had property disputes. He submitted that there could be some other situations also like a mother filing a proceeding on behalf of herself and her minor son and would be required to pay Court fees for the minor son though she would not be required to pay Court fees for herself. Apart from relying upon the interpretation given to the adverb "relating to" by Sirpurkar J., Mr. Grover referred me to a judgment of a Division Bench of this Court in Nagin v. Huribhai, , and particularly paragraph 11 thereof.

"The said section 41 speaks of "all suits and proceedings between a licensor and licensee, or a landlord and tenant, relating to the recovery of possession of any immovable property situated in Greater Bombay". It is significant that the words used in the said section 41 are "suits relating to the recovery of possession" and not "suits for possession". Rule 12 of O. 20 of the Civil P.O., 1908 provides as to how a Court is to proceed "where a suit is for the recovery of possession of immovable property and for rent or mesne profits". The contrast between the language used in O. 20, R. 12 and the said section 41 immediately strikes one. The phrase "relating to the possession of any immovable property" is wider than the phrase "for the recovery of possession of any immovable property". The words "relating to" are intentionally and designedly used in the said section 41 not to confine the section only to a suit for the recovery of possession of immovable property situate in Greater Bombay but also to permit to be included within the ambit of such a suit all other reliefs which the plaintiff can claim in a suit for the recovery of possession of immovable property on the termination of a licence or a tenancy."
14. Mr. Nair, learned Counsel appearing for one of the litigants, drew my attention to the facts of his case where a lady employee had given a loan from all her earnings and she was required to file a summary suit to recover that amount since the amount was not being repaid. Similar were the submissions of Ms. Nazareth appearing for other lady litigants who have filed summary suits and who are seeking an exemption under the phrase "property" as raised in the earlier Notification without being influenced by the amending Notification.

15. As stated above, Mr. Halvasia for the defendant, on the other hand, submitted that the intention of the State was only to give benefit to women in distress and the commercial transactions were not sought to be included. He submitted that whatever judgments might have been given by the Judges from time to time, what was required was to give a correct interpretation and the explanation given in the new Notification had to be kept in mind. He submitted that otherwise this wilt be a misuse of a benevolent provision for commercial purposes which was not the intention of the State.

16. Mr. Vahanvati, learned Advocate General, maintained that the intention of the State Government while issuing the earlier Notification was to give the benefit only for the purposes which are mentioned in Clause 8.4 of the policy for women. Clauses 8.4 and 8.5.8. in the policy read as follows:-

"8.4 The Government will also request the Government of India to (a) review all statutes dealing with women's access to property both at the matrimonial and maternal home and ensure equity to women; and (b) review the working and procedures relating to the Family Courts.
8.5.8 Court fees will be exempt for women litigants in cases relating to (a) Maintenance, (b) Property, (c) Violence and (d) Divorce."
Mr. Vahanvati submitted that the phrase "property disputes" appearing in the Notification of 1st October, 1994 could not be utilized for disputes covering business, commerce and trade and the entire clause had to be read ejusdem-generis. In his submission, at all times, as stated by the Under Secretary to the Government in his affidavit, the intention of the State was not to grant benefit to property claims of all types. He submitted that the amending Notification had become necessary "to prevent persons from taking unfair advantage of the concession" and he relied upon that very phrase used by the Apex Court in Union of India v. Paliwal Electricals (P) Ltd., thereof. He also referred me to a judgement of the Constitution Bench in D.N. Banerji v. P.R, Mukherjee, and particularly paragraph 12 thereof to emphasise that the set-up and the context of the provision has also to be looked into and not merely the words used. The relevant quotation reads as follows: -

"It is no doubt true that the meaning should be ascertained only from the words employed in the definitions, but the set-up and context are also relevant for ascertaining what exactly was meant to be conveyed by the terminology employed. As observed by Lord Atkinson in - Keats v. Lewis Merthyr Consolidated Collieries Ltd., 1911 A.C. 641. "In the construction of a statute it is, of course, at all times and under all circumstances permissible to have regard to the State of things existing at the time the statute was passed, and to the evils, which as appears from its provisions, it was designed to remedy". If the words are capable of one meaning alone, then it must be adopted, but if they are susceptible of wider import, we have to pay regard to what the statute or the particular piece of legislation had in view. Though the definition may be more or less the same in two different statutes, still the objects to be achieved not only as set out in the preamble but also as gatherable from the antecedent history of the legislation may be widely different. The same words may mean one thing in one context and another in a different context. This is the reason why decisions on the meaning of particular words or collection of words found in other statutes are scarcely of much value when we have to deal with a specific statute of our own; they may be helpful, but cannot be taken as guides or precedents."
17. Having made the above submissions, however, the learned Advocate General was fair enough to accept that, as stated above, a time of over 5 years and 5 months has gone from the initial Notification of 1st October, 1994 by the time the amending Notification came to be issued. He was also fair enough to accept that in the meanwhile a number of judgments have been given covering variety of controversies and in some cases on the basis of concession given by the Government Pleaders concerned. He stated that his instructions were that even the pending matters ought to be covered under the amending Notification and that at all material times, the State Government never intended to cover the matters governing commerce, trade and business, yet he would leave it to the Court to pass appropriate orders governing the cases which have already come to be filed.

18. There was some controversy with respect to the suits filed by partnership firms where the women alone are the directors. It was canvassed by Mr. Jain that one has to see as to whether the ladies are the partners and if so they ought to be given the exemption under the 1994 Notification in the pending matters. The learned Advocate General as well as Mr. Halvasia opposed this submission, and particularly laid emphasis on the approach adopted by the Division Bench in the unreported Judgment and order given in Appeal (Lodging) No. 1254 of 1999 Smt. Suhasini Revankar v. Bank of India. They emphasised that the Notification talks of giving exemption to "women litigants". A partnership firm which intends to come to the Court has to be a registered firm and for a suit to be entertained by a firm it has to be a suit by a registered firm under section 69(2A) of the Indian Partnership Act. That being the position, a suit by a partnership firm would not get the exemption which is available to women litigants.

19. I have considered the submissions made by the Counsel for the women litigants as well as the Counsel for the defendants as also by the Advocate General.

(i) As far as the two issues which have been framed by me are concerned, my answer on Issue No. 2 will be that the Notification dated 23rd March 2000 will not restrict and/or govern and/or control the exemption granted by the earlier Notification of 1st October, 1994 with regard to payment of Court fees to women litigants provided those are suits filed by women litigants in their personal capacity. The suits filed by them as directors of companies or as partners of firms will not make them eligible to get the exemption in the pending matters.

(ii) As far as the applicability of the Notification of 1 st October, 1994 is concerned, which is Issue No. 1, it will continue to apply to the suits which are already filed and which are pending in this Court though subject to the above, namely that those suits which are filed by women directors of companies or women partners of partnership firms will not make them eligible for exemption under the Notification.

(iii) The answers to these two issues will grant exemption normally to all the women litigants who have filed their suits in this Court in their personal capacity and which are pending in objection before the Prothonotary & Senior Master, subject to the exceptions stated above.

(iv) In those cases, where however for reasons to be recorded, the Prothonotary takes the view that the women litigants are required to pay the Court fees, that would be subject to a revision as provided under section 5(2) of the Bombay Court Fees Act, 1959.

(v) This will also not prevent the defendants from raising their objections when the suits are lodged and numbered without payment of Court fees. They will be entitled to raise their objections before the concerned Judge by filing their written statements as and when the suit is taken up for hearing.

(vi) In matters of probate petition and succession certificate, my brother K.G. Shah, J. in his earlier order has taken the view that the moment a lady litigant files a proceeding, she will not be required to pay the Court fees. 1 have taken a view after referring to the judgment of K.G. Shah, J. that the women beneficiaries will not be required to pay the Court fees only to the extent they are getting benefit in the estate. The same view is taken by Nijjar J. in his order of 10th February, 2000 but he has specifically differed with the view taken by K.G. Shah, J. The office faces the problem and as far as pending matters are concerned, a query was made to Nijjar J. as to what approach the office should adopt. My brother Nijjar J. kept the decision in abeyance since the present controversy was pending in this Court. In view of what is stated above, in my view, it would be appropriate that from the date of the order passed by Nijjar J., i.e. 10th February, 2000 effect be given to the view that I have taken as well as the view taken by Nijjar J., viz. that only to the extent women are beneficiaries, Court fees will not be required.

(vii) Needless to state that the matters filed on and after 23rd March 2000 will be governed under the Notification of that date.

20. In view of what is stated above, the objection raised in Suit No. 1638 of 1998 is rejected. The summons for judgment taken out in this matter will be taken up for hearing in due course.

21. Notice issued to the Advocate General stands discharged.

22. An ordinary copy of this order duly authenticated by the Personal Secretary of this Court be made available to the parties.
================================================================================


================================================================================
CASE 17:
[Cites 53, Cited by 2]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
G.B.C.Raj Gopal vs The Government Of A.P. Rep., By The ... on 24 April, 2014
Author: Ramesh Ranganathan
Bench: Ramesh Ranganathan
       

  

  

 
 
 THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE RAMESH RANGANATHAN             

WRIT PETITION NO.34137 of 2013    

24-04-2014 

G.B.C.Raj Gopal.Petitioner     

The Government of A.P. rep., by the Principal Secretary, Home Department,
Secretariat Buildings, Secretariat, Hyderabad, A.P. and six others..Respondents

Counsel for the petitioner: Mr. Mohd. Shafiuddin

Counsel for respondents: Government Pleader for Home; 
            Sri M. Karunasagar;
            Sri R. Raghunandan, Senior Counsel for P. Shreyas Reddy;
            Sri D. Srinivas.
<GIST:  

>HEAD NOTE:    

?Citations:

1)      (2014) 2 SCC 1 
2)      1992 Supp (1) SCC 335  
3)      (2013) Cri.L.J. 776 (SC)
4)      AIR 1964 SC 221  
5)      AIR 1955 SC 196  
6)      AIR 1959 SC 707  
7)      1982 Cri.L.J 1557 (Kerala HC FB)
8)      1976 Cri.L.J 1825 (All HC-Lucknow Bench) 
9)      (2010) 7 SCC 667 
10)     (1994) 4 SCC 260 
11)     2002(2) AnW.R. 582 = 2002(2) ALD (Crl). 706 (A.P).
12)     AIR 1997 SC 610  
13)       (2005) 3 SCC 647 
14)       Judgment in W.P.No.523 of 2014 dated 21.01.2014  
15)       2004(4) ALT 175
16)     Judgment in W.P. No.13391 of 2006 dated 14.07.2006  


THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE RAMESH RANGANATHAN             

WRIT PETITION No.34137 OF 2013    

ORDER:
The action of respondents 3 and 4, in calling and pressurizing the petitioner to subscribe his signature to the already prepared documents without disclosing the contents thereof; in threatening to implicate him in criminal cases if he failed to do so; and in forcing him to yield to the illegal demands of the 5th respondent giving up his right, title share and interest in the devolved properties; is questioned in this Writ Petition as being arbitrary and illegal. The petitioner and the fifth respondent are siblings. The Deputy Commissioner of Police, West Zone, Hyderabad is the 3rd respondent, and the Inspector of Police, Sanjeeva Reddy Nagar P.S. is the 4th respondent. The 3rd respondent is arrayed as respondent No.6 eo-nominee, and the 4th respondent is arrayed as respondent No.7 eo-nominee. They shall, hereinafter, be referred to as respondents 3 and 4 respectively.

2. The petitioner, a software engineer and a green card holder, claims to have come to Hyderabad from the U.S.A. on 11.09.2013. It is his case that his sister (the 5th respondent),who was staying in Malakpet, had approached S.R. Nagar police station claiming to be a resident of Ameerpet; Sri Ajit Kumar, the Sub-Inspector of Police, S.R. Nagar police station had called him over the telephone at 1.00 p.m. on 14.11.2013, and had asked him to come to the police station; the 4th respondent-Inspector of Police did not show him the complaint lodged by the 5th respondent or divulge its contents; he was taken in a police jeep, from S.R. Nagar police station, to the office of the DCP - West Zone at A.C. Guards; he was directed to make himself available again, at the office of the Deputy Commissioner of Police, West Zone, on 19.11.2013 at 2.45 pm; when he went there on 19.11.2013, the 3rd respondent informed him that a complaint was lodged against him by the 5th respondent with the S.R. Nagar police station; it was not necessary to disclose the contents of the complaint to him, and he should effect a settlement and divide the properties with his sister i.e., the 5th respondent; he informed the 3rd respondent that neither had he committed any offence nor were there any questionable antecedents against him, except the alleged complaint said to have been lodged by the 5th respondent with the S.R. Nagar police station; he could not be asked to make himself available at the office of the 3rd respondent more so for division of properties, between him and the 5th respondent, which was a civil dispute in which the police had no right to interfere; the 5th respondent, who was present in the office of the 3rd respondent, started demanding that he give up his right, interest and share in certain flats and other properties; when he declined, the 3rd respondent asked him to affix his signature on prepared documents and stamp papers; when he demanded to know its contents, the 3rd respondent sternly instructed him to obey orders and do as he was told, otherwise criminal cases would be instituted preventing him from leaving the country to proceed back to the USA; he was subjected to various pressures and turmoils at the hands of the 5th respondent, and her henchmen; as he had offered resistance, the 5th respondent was surreptitiously putting the office of the 3rd respondent to use, meting out threats of implicating him in false criminal cases, in the event he refused to yield to her illegal demands that he give up his share and entitlement in the devolved properties; the 3rd respondent had asked him to leave his office and return at 11.00 am on 23.11.2013 after making up his mind on signing the documents that would be produced on that day; he was asked not to divulge these events to any one outside the office; he did not bring these facts to the notice of higher police authorities fearing a back lash from the 3rd respondent; and the action of respondents 3 and 4 is illegal and unauthorised, and has resulted in violation of his fundamental rights.

3. This Writ Petition was filed in the High Court Registry on 26.11.2013 after a copy thereof was served on the office of the Government Pleader in the High Court. The Writ Petition was listed before this Court on 28.11.2013 and, in view of the serious allegations made against a senior officer in the cadre of Deputy Commissioner of Police, the matter was directed to be listed the next day i.e., 29.11.2013 to enable the Learned Government Pleader for Home to obtain instructions. On 29.11.2013, the Learned Government Pleader for Home placed before this Court the records including a copy of FIR No.936 of 2013 dated 27.11.2013 registered with the S.R. Nagar police station, against the petitioner, for offences under Sections 323, 506 and 509 IPC. Section 323 IPC relates to voluntarily causing hurt and is a non-cognizable offence. Section 506 IPC, which relates to criminal intimidation, is also a non-cognizable offence. Section 509 IPC relates to an offence of insulting the modesty of any woman etc, and is a cognizable offence.

4. In its proceedings dated 29.11.2013, this Court noted that the records placed before it contained a copy of the complaint given by the 5th respondent which did not bear any date, but contained an endorsement of having been received on 27.11.2013 at 22.00 hours. This Court was, prima facie, of the view that, when the Writ Petition was filed on 26.11.2013, the petitioner could not have visualized that a complaint would be lodged against him by his sister on the next day i.e., 27.11.2013 at 22.00 hours that too at S.R. Nagar police station against whose officials he had levelled grave and serious allegations in the Writ affidavit; it defied reason that the 5th respondent should give a complaint late at night at 22.00 hours on 27.11.2013 for an incident which allegedly took place more than a fortnight prior thereto on 10.11.2013, if it were for reasons other than the Writ Petition having been filed before this Court; prima facie, it appeared that a concocted complaint was hurriedly registered on the night of 27.11.2013 as the Writ Petition was to be listed before this Court on 28.11.2013; if, as was sought to be made out by the 4th respondent, such an incident had taken place on 10.11.2013 no efforts were made by respondents 3 and 4 to ascertain why the 5th respondent chose to remain silent for more than a fortnight; and if, on the other hand, an oral complaint was made by the 5th respondent on 10.11.2013, it should have been reduced into writing under Section 154 Cr.P.C immediately thereafter.

5. The 2nd respondent was directed to cause an enquiry into the incident and submit a report to this Court by 02.12.2013; forthwith transfer investigation of the complaint from S.R. Nagar police station; entrust investigation to any other police officer, not subordinate to the 3rd respondent; and consider whether respondents 3 and 4 should be permitted to remain in active duty pending further enquiry. Interim stay was granted. The records, relating to FIR No.936 of 2013, were called for from the III Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Nampally, to whom the said FIR had been forwarded by the SR Nagar police station and the records, placed before it, were directed to be kept in a sealed cover with the High Court Registry.

6. In compliance with the order of this Court dated 29.11.2013, the 2nd respondent-Commissioner of Police had an enquiry caused by the Joint Commissioner of Police. In his enquiry report dated 05.12.2013, the Joint Commissioner of Police has observed that the 5th respondent is a widow and an orphan surviving on rents received from the Flats left behind by her deceased parents at Jaya Residency, Malakpet, Hyderabad; the petitioner, her brother and sole sibling, lives in the USA; since the death of their father in the year, 2000 they have been unable to reach an understanding over sharing of properties left behind by their deceased parents; they had involved others in their quarrel, with the petitioners brother- in-law on his side and Sri Ramanjaneyulu on the side of the 5th respondent; having gained no positive result the 5th respondent, to save her family reputation and avoid lodging a police case against her brother, had approached the 3rd respondent seeking his counselling; she had, subsequently, made 3 to 4 visits to the office of the Deputy Commissioner of Police, West Zone; the 3rd respondent had arranged counselling, for both the parties, atleast on two occasions; no amicable solution could, however, be reached as the petitioner disappeared from the office of the DCP West Zone; the 5th respondent changed her mind, and decided to lodge a formal complaint in S.R. Nagar police station on 27.11.2013 mentioning the attack on her at S.R. Nagar Signals on 10.11.2013 at 22.00 hours; on the basis of this complaint, Cr. No.936 of 2013 was registered at S.R. Nagar Police Station on 27.11.2013 at 20.00 hours; on receipt of the letter of the Government Pleader for Home dated 29.11.2013, communicating the order of this Court, the case was transferred to CCS, Hyderabad on 30.11.2013, before any tangible progress was made in investigation by the S.R.Nagar P.S; on receipt of a fax message from the Commissioner of Police, Hyderabad on 30.11.2013, the case was re-registered in Central Crime Station as Cr. No.181 of 2013 under the same sections of law, and investigation is in progress.

7. In its order dated 11.12.2013, this Court noted that the records of the Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate disclosed that the complaint was received in his Court at 4.00 p.m., on 28.11.2013 after this Court, by its proceedings dated 28.11.2013, had granted time to the Learned Government Pleader to obtain instructions, and had posted the matter for hearing on 29.11.2013; and the FIR Index Register disclosed the possibility of FIR No.936 of 2013 being ante-dated. As it was, prima facie, of the view that a false criminal case was manufactured only because the petitioner chose to invoke its jurisdiction, this Court called for a report from the 1st respondent as to what action needed to be taken against respondents 3 and 4 for their highhanded and illegal acts of resorting to settlement of private civil disputes. Respondents 3 and 4 were impleaded as respondents 6 and 7 eo- nominee.

8. In his report to this Court, the first respondent-Principal Secretary, Home stated that, pursuant to the instructions issued by Government vide Memo No.37993/PSC/A3/13, dt.23.12.2013 for an enquiry by a Committee, which was constituted for monitoring and enquiry into complaints on Police interference in Civil disputes and recommend action on erring Police personnel, the Director General of Police, by his letter dated 31.12.2013, had furnished the report of the said enquiry committee which disclosed that the parties in W.P.No.34137 of 2013 were examined and their statements recorded, except that of the petitioner as he had returned to the USA. The Committee was of the view that there was inordinate delay in dispatch of the FIR in Cr.No.936/2013 to the Court; the FIR was received in the court at 4.00 PM on 28.11.2013; on perusal of DSR of West Zone for 27.11.2013, which was received by all committee members on 28.11.2013 before 6.00 AM, Cr.No.936 of 2013 found mention, thereby establishing that Cr.No.936 of 2013 was registered on 27.11.2013 at 22.00 hours; the Committee perused the petition of R-5 dated 13.11.2013, and had noticed that there had been an attempt to change the place of residence of the petitioner from Jaya Residency to Jaya Nagar by striking off the word residency in telugu and adding the word nagar in telugu; their enquiries further revealed that there is no Jaya Nagar in Ameerpet area; the Committee found fault with the endorsement CI, SR Nagar Call both the parties and do justice to the deserved of the DCP, West Zone upon the petition of R-5, dated 13.11.2013; it also faulted the DCP, West Zone for not registering a case in immediate response to the petition of R-5 and, instead, calling the Writ Petitioner repeatedly to his office to sort out the dispute; when the Committee examined Smt.Rena Chowdary R-5 and Anjaneyulu who was said to be in her company at the time of the purported incident on 10.11.2013 in S.R.Nagar PS limits, they strongly and firmly took the same stand that the incident of 10.11.2013 did take place; the matter is under investigation by the ACP, CCS; since the report of the Committee established the fault of the DCP, West Zone, the Home Department, while agreeing with the same, had forwarded the said report, vide proceedings dated 01.01.2014, to the General Administration (SC.D) Department which deals with the subject matter of initiating suitable disciplinary action against IPS officers; and no overt act or negligence has been established by the committee in its findings against Respondent No.4, the CI.

9. In his counter-affidavit the 2nd respondent has stated that, in compliance with the order of this Court dated 29.11.2013, he had instructed the Joint Commissioner to conduct a detailed enquiry into the matter and submit a report; the case in Cr. No.936 of 2013, on the file of the SR Nagar Police Station, was transferred on the evening of 05.12.2013 to the Central Crime Station, Hyderabad for investigation; CCS, Hyderabad is a separate unit, and is not subordinate to the 3rd respondent; on its transfer, the case has been re-registered as Cr. No.182 of 2013, and investigation has been taken up; the Joint Commissioner of Police, Hyderabad is an officer in the cadre of a Deputy Inspector General of Police, higher in rank than the Deputy Commissioner; he had conducted a detailed enquiry and submitted a report on 05.12.2013; as per the instructions issued by the Government, vide memo No.37993/PSC/A3 dated 23.12.2013, a committee was constituted to enquire whether police officials had interfered in civil disputes; the said committee consisted of the Commissioner of Police, the Additional Commissioner of Police (Law & order) and the Additional Commissioner of Police (Crimes and SIT). Daily situation reports (DSR) are prepared by police stations in all five zones of Hyderabad; the DSR contains crime reports, law and order issues, FIRs, VIP movements etc; the concerned DCPs have to consolidate the DSR every day with the information received from the police stations and submit the same, (both the soft and the hard copy), to the Commissioner of Police and other officials by 6.00 AM; the DSR, prepared in the office of the DCP West Zone dated 27.11.2013, was received by the 2nd respondent on 28.11.2013 in the morning itself; this procedure of DSR facilitated him and other higher officials to monitor the day to day affairs in all police stations in the twin cities; the DSR of West Zone for 27.11.2013, which was received before 6.00 A.M. on 28.11.2013, records Cr. No.936 of 2013; and this establishes that Cr. No.936 of 2013 was registered on 27.11.2013 itself. The 2nd respondent faults not only the endorsement of the 3rd respondent dated 13.11.2013, as CI, SR Nagar call to both parties and do justice to the deserved, but also his failure to register the case immediately in response to the petition of the 5th respondent and in calling the petitioner to his office to sort out the dispute. He submits that there was no evidence to show that the 3rd respondent had pressurised the petitioner to come forward to sign on prepared documents; no overt act or negligence was established by the committee in its findings against the fourth respondent; and many a time, he had issued oral and general instructions to all Station House Officers/Assistant Commissioners of Police in Hyderabad City not to interfere in civil disputes and, if any deviation was noticed, disciplinary action would be taken against the concerned individuals.

10. Elaborate submissions were made by Sri Mohd. Shafiuddin, Learned Counsel for the petitioner; the Learned Government Pleader for Home appearing on behalf of respondents 1 and 2, Sri R. Raghunandan, Learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the 3rd respondent, Sri Damalapati Srinivas, Learned Counsel for the 4th respondent and Sri M. Karunasagar, Learned Counsel for the 5th respondent. It is convenient to examine the contentions, put forth by Counsel on either side, under different heads. I. ROLE OF RESPONDENTS 3 AND 4 IN CALLING THE PETITIONER TO THE S.R. NAGAR POLICE STATION, AND THE OFFICE OF THE DCP, WEST ZONE, WITHOUT EVEN REGISTERING THE COMPLAINT, OF THE FIFTH RESPONDENT, UNDER SECTION 154 CRPC:

11. Sri R. Raghunandan, Learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of respondent No.3, would fairly state that respondent No.5 had met the 3rd respondent at his office on 13th November, 2013; the endorsement made on her complaint, to the Circle Inspector of Police S.R. Nagar police station on 13.11.2013, was by the 3rd respondent; the Sub-Inspector of Police, S.R. Nagar police station was instructed by the 3rd respondent to bring the petitioner to his office on 14th November; and the petitioner was asked to be present in the office of the 3rd respondent both on 14th and 19th November, 2013. Learned Senior Counsel would, however, contend that the 3rd respondent did not force the petitioner to settle the matter with the fifth respondent, or sign any papers; he had only sought to resolve family disputes, which is permissible in terms of para 120.6 of the judgment of the Supreme Court in Lalita Kumari v. Govt. of U.P. ; the memo issued by the Director General of Police on 25.11.2013 shows that the 3rd respondent was required to undertake family counselling; and the petitioner has filed the present Writ Petition only to stall further proceedings against him.

12. Sri M. Karunasagar, Learned Counsel for the fifth respondent, would paint the petitioner in poor light. He submits that the petitioner was exploiting his widowed sister and had tried every trick in the book to deprive her of her rightful share of her property; not only did he threaten to kill her if she did not yield to his illegal demands, but he had also assaulted her physically on 10th November, 2013; despite the shabby treatment meted out to her by her brother (the petitioner), the fifth respondent wanted an amicable solution to their inter-se property disputes; and she did not initially wish to lodge a criminal complaint against him as that would tarnish their family reputation.

13. In his counter-affidavit the 3rd respondent submits that the 5th respondent met him at his office on 13.11.2013, and complained that her brother (the writ petitioner) along with his brother-in-law had assaulted her on 10.11.2013 in S.R. Nagar area, when she was coming back from the house of her relatives in the company of her cousin; she had also stated that this assault was a part of the ongoing fight over her fathers property in which she had a rightful share; she was highly agitated and feared for her physical safety; despite the petitioners behaviour towards her, she was not interested in lodging a formal criminal complaint, as the accused was her brother; he had informed her that the proper course would be to approach the concerned SHO i.e., SHO, Sanjeevaeddynagar police station, and had endorsed the same on the written representation given by her to him; he had also informed the 4th respondent, and had asked him to look into the matter; the 5th respondent again came to his office on 14.11.2013 and complained that the 4th respondent was not taking any interest in her case, and had insisted that he should look into the matter, failing which she apprehended further physical assault; as the 5th respondent feared for her safety on the one hand, and was not willing to move forward and invoke the criminal law process on the other, he had directed the 4th respondent to locate the petitioner and inform him that he would like to meet him to verify facts before any further process was initiated; thereafter at his office on the same day, when the 5th respondent was also present, he had enquired about the matter with the petitioner who requested for time to set out his side of the case; the petitioner had insisted that he had not assaulted his sister, and had not deprived her of any part of the property; he stated that he would come back on 19.11.2013 with his relatives who would be able to attest to these facts; the 5th respondent informed that she would also be present on 19.11.2013; the petitioner and the 5th respondent came to his office on 19.11.2013; their maternal uncle also accompanied the 5th respondent; the petitioner also brought one of his friends; in the meeting, the petitioners uncle tried to counsel the petitioner and had asked him to amicably resolve issues; as these issues were getting more complicated, he had requested all the parties to leave his room as other visitors were waiting to meet him; the petitioner left his office premises thereafter, and the matter ended there; the 5th respondent continued to meet him, and had asked him to intervene in the matter, as she apprehended further trouble and physical danger both to her and her minor daughter; when the 5th respondent met him at his office on 27.11.2013, he instructed the 4th respondent to register a formal complaint, and investigate further into the matter; the 5th respondent had, thereafter, approached the 4th respondent on 27.11.2013 at 8.00 PM; he had not instructed any subordinate officer, including the 4th respondent, to take forcible action or to forcibly bring the petitioner to his office; he had sought to verify facts before commencing the procedure prescribed under the Cr.P.C; he neither directed the petitioner to settle his property disputes nor did he pressurize him to sign documents or transfer his rights in his fathers property in favour of the 5th respondent; his only concern was the physical safety of the 5th respondent; he never called the petitioner to his office after 19.11.2013; the 5th respondent kept coming to his office seeking protection as she felt that she was still under physical threat; he had again instructed the 4th respondent to formally register the complaint, and take up investigation; and the petitioner had filed the Writ Petition only to ensure that his earlier actions, including the assault on his sister, does not result in criminal investigation.

14. In his additional counter-affidavit filed before this Court the 3rd respondent submits that he had interacted with the petitioner and the 5th respondent only to ascertain facts, and give a quietus to the issue arising out of the conduct of the petitioner with the 5th respondent; he had neither pressurized the petitioner to sign on any prepared documents nor had he threatened to involve him in criminal cases, if he failed to do so; he did not instruct the SR Nagar Police Station, or the Sub-Inspector of Police, to bring the petitioner and his sister in a police jeep by force; what he had instructed was to send them to his office; even as per the statement of the petitioner, before the Joint Commissioner on 01.12.2013, the Inspector had asked him to accompany SI Ajay Kumar in the police jeep to his office; he had called the petitioner and the 5th respondent in good faith, and with the bonafide intention of preventing any untoward incident; and he had treated it as a family dispute, and not a civil dispute.

15. In his counter-affidavit the fourth respondent states that the 3rd respondent had called him over phone and had informed him that he was sending the 5th respondent along with an endorsed complaint against her brother; the 3rd respondent, while directing him not to register the complaint since it related to a dispute between a brother and sister, had instructed him to produce both parties before him at his office; the 5th respondent was sent to SR Nagar police station, by the 3rd respondent on 13.11.2013, with his endorsement on her telugu complaint as CI SR Nagar please call both parties and do the justice deserved; the complaint showed that there was a property dispute between the 5th respondent and the petitioner; the complainant alleged that she had been threatened by her brother, and his brother-in-law; she had requested him to take action against them; after going through the contents of the complaint, he had advised the 5th respondent to approach the competent Civil Court as the allegations in the complaint were civil in nature; in the morning hours of 14.11.2013, he received a phone call from the 3rd respondent instructing him to call and produce the petitioner before him, as he wanted to counsel both of them in his office; he informed the 3rd respondent that there was no such locality called Jayanagar in the limits of S.R. Nagar police station, at which the alleged incident is said to have taken place; even then the 3rd respondent had asked him to summon and produce the petitioner before him for counselling; in obedience to the directions of the 3rd respondent he had entrusted the task of contacting the petitioner to Sri D. Ajay Kumar, S.I. of police, and had asked him to produce both the parties before the 3rd respondent; he had simply obeyed the instructions of his superior officer in the fear of facing his wrath; the S.I. of Police had contacted the petitioner over his mobile on 14.11.2013 at 1.00 p.m; he had asked the petitioner to come to the police station as he was summoned by the 3rd respondent to be present before him, as his sister had given a complaint making allegations against him; at 5.00 p.m. the petitioner and his brother-in-law came to the police station; in accordance with the instructions of the 3rd respondent, the petitioner was taken to the office of the DCP, West Zone by the Sub-Inspector of Police Sri D. Ajaykumar; he has no knowledge of what transpired thereafter in the office of the 3rd respondent; again on 27.11.2013 the 3rd respondent instructed him over phone to register a case on the complaint of the 5th respondent; he was not present in the police station when the 5th respondent approached at 8.00 p.m; and Sri M. Seetaramulu, S.I. of Police, had registered Crime No.936 of 2013 under Sections 323, 506 and 509 IPC.

16. In her counter-affidavit the fifth respondent submits that on 10.11.2013 at about 10.00 PM, when she was returning from Kukatpally after crossing SR Nagar traffic signals, the petitioner and his brother-in-law had stopped their vehicle; the petitioners brother-in-law slapped her, and her brother beat her black and blue; when she cried, they left the scene of the offence quickly; they also demanded that she sign on documents relinquishing her share of the property; on 13.11.2013 morning, she and Sri Ramanjaneyulu went to the 3rd respondent; she submitted a petition regarding the attack on her and the threat to her life from the petitioner and his brother-in-law over property disputes; she had requested the 3rd respondent to elicit the nature of the offence, instead of registering the complaint against his brother; as the disputes related to properties, and to ensure that the police did not interfere in civil disputes, she had requested that the petitioner be called, counselled and restrained from threatening her regarding the property; the 3rd respondent had endorsed the complaint to the 4th respondent; on 14.11.2013, the 4th respondent had sent both of them to the 3rd respondent where they were counselled by the 3rd respondent; the 3rd respondent had only advised both of them to settle their family disputes; there was no threat or coercion by the 3rd respondent; though he was busy in attending to people visiting his office, the meeting was held in his office room; since the dispute was not resolved, they had both requested the 3rd respondent to give them time upto 19.11.2013, and had promised to visit his office again; her maternal uncle had come to Hyderabad at her request, and had visited the office of the 3rd respondent along with her and Sri Ramanjaneyulu on 19.11.2013; the petitioner was also present in the office of the 3rd respondent along with Sri Venkat Reddy; as the 3rd respondent was busy with official work, he did not devote much time; he only asked the petitioner not to threaten her; the 3rd respondent had asked all of them to leave his chambers as he had to attend to some more complainants waiting outside; after coming out of the chambers of the 3rd respondent, the petitioner had again threatened her with direconsequences, and had stated that he would file cases against the police officers who were supporting her; the petitioners intention in filing the Writ Petition is only to ensure that no police officer helped her against his criminal acts; she and her minor daughter have a threat to their lives at the hands of the petitioner; the petitioner has the active support of a sitting MLA; though she had approached the MLA, and had narrated the injustice done to her, nothing had happened; and this itself showed that the petitioner, by hook or crook, was seeking to deprive her of her valuable and legal property rights.

17. From the counter-affidavit of the 4th respondent it is evident that the 3rd respondent had asked him not to register the complaint of the 5th respondent which he had endorsed on 13.11.2013, and to produce both the petitioner and the 5th respondent before him; in the morning of 14th November, 2013 he received a phone call from the 3rd respondent instructing him to produce the petitioner before him for counselling; he had asked the Sub-Inspector Sri D. Ajay Kumar to produce both parties before the 3rd respondent; the Sub-Inspector had called the petitioner over mobile and asked him to come to the police station; when the petitioner and his brother-in-law came to the police station at 5.00 P.M. on 14.11.2013 in his car, he was taken by the Sub-Inspector, to the office of the 3rd respondent, in a police jeep. In his statement, before the Joint Commissioner of Police on 01.12.2013 at 03.30 P.M, the petitioner stated that on 19.11.2013 he received a call on his phone number 8096102190 from the office of the D.C.P., West Zone and, in response thereto, he had gone over to the office of the 3rd respondent at 2.45 P.M where he was detained till 9.30 P.M. The counter-affidavit of the 2nd respondent, and the enquiry report of the Joint Commissioner, show that the petitioner was counselled, in the office of the D.C.P., West Zone, by the 3rd respondent both on 14th and 19th November, 2013 without even registering the complaint of the 5th respondent containing the endorsement of the 3rd respondent dated 13.11.2013.

18. The question which necessitates examination is whether the petitioner could have been, orally and forcibly, summoned to his office by the 3rd respondent even before registration of the complaint under Section 154 CrPC. The first information report is either given in writing or is reduced to writing. The Code contemplates two kinds of FIRs: the duly signed FIR under Section 154(1) is by the informant to the officer concerned at the police station. The second kind of FIR is one which is registered by the police officer himself on the basis of information received, or other than by way of an informant [Section 157(1)]. This information must also be duly recorded, and a copy should be sent to the Magistrate forthwith. (Lalita Kumari1). The sine qua non for recording an FIR is that there must be an information, and that information must disclose a cognizable offence. If information disclosing a cognizable offence, satisfying the requirements of Section 154(1) Cr.P.C, is laid before him, the police officer has no option but to enter the substance thereof in the prescribed form i.e., to register a case on the basis of such information. (State of Haryana v. Bhajan Lal ). In registering an FIR the consent, or otherwise, of the complainant is irrelevant. For cognizable offences a duty is cast upon the police to register an FIR, and conduct investigation. The legislative intent of Section 154(1) CrPC is to ensure that the information, relating to the commission of a cognizable offence, is promptly registered and investigated in accordance with law. (Lalita Kumari1). The context in which the word shall appears in Section 154(1) CrPC, the object for which it has been used and the consequences that will follow from the infringement of the direction to register FIRs, show that the word shall, used in Section 154(1), is mandatory in character. Section 154(1) of the Code places an unequivocal duty upon the police officer, in charge of a police station, to register an FIR on receipt of information that a cognizable offence has been committed, and does not confer any discretion on him to embark upon a preliminary inquiry prior to the registration of the FIR. (Lalita Kumari1; Anju Chaudhary v. State of Uttar Pradesh ; State of Uttar Pradesh v. Bhagwant Kishore Joshi ).

19. The requirement of Section 154 Cr.P.C is only that the report must disclose the commission of a cognizable offence, and that is sufficient to set the investigating machinery in motion. The intention of the legislature, by the insertion of sub-section (3) of Section 154, is to ensure that no information of the commission of a cognizable offence is ignored or is not acted upon. The obligation to register an FIR has inherent advantages. (a) It is the first step to access to justice for a victim; (b) It upholds the rule of law in as much as the ordinary person brings forth the commission of a cognizable crime to the knowledge of the State; (c) It also facilitates swift investigation and sometimes even prevention of the crime. In both cases, it only effectuates the regime of law; and (d) It leads to less manipulation in criminal cases and lessens incidents of antedated FIR or deliberately delayed FIR. The object sought to be achieved by registering the earliest information as an FIR is, inter alia, two fold: one, that the criminal process is set into motion and is well documented from the very start; and second, that the earliest information, received in relation to the commission of a cognizable offence, is recorded so that there cannot be any embellishment, etc. later. The FIR is registered in a book called the FIR book or the FIR register. A copy of each FIR is sent to the superior officers and to the concerned Judicial Magistrate. The signature of the complainant is obtained in the FIR book as and when a complaint is given at the police station. As each FIR has a unique annual number, it is possible for supervisory police officers and the courts, wherever necessary, to exercise strict control and keep track of registration of FIRs. The underpinnings of compulsory registration of the FIR is not only to ensure transparency in the criminal justice-delivery system but also to ensure judicial oversight. Section 157(1) deploys the word forthwith. Any information received under Section 154(1), or otherwise, has to be promptly informed, in the form of a report, to the Magistrate. The commission of a cognizable offence is not only brought to the knowledge of the investigating agency but also to the subordinate judiciary. (Lalita Kumari1).

20. The 3rd respondent has acted amiss in directing the 4th respondent not to register an FIR, on the information furnished in the representation submitted by the 5th respondent on 13.11.2013, on the specious plea that she had requested that the complaint not be registered but the petitioner be counselled, instead, at the S.R. Nagar police station or the office of the 3rd respondent. Registration of an FIR under Section 154(1) Cr.P.C. is not at the choice of the complainant. Once information, either oral or written, regarding commission of a cognizable offence is brought to the notice of the police officer, he has no option but to register the FIR forthwith. The police officer cannot avoid his duty of registering the offence if a cognizable offence is disclosed. Action must be taken against the erring officer who does not register the FIR if information received by him discloses the commission of a cognizable offence. (Lalita Kumari1).

II. INVESTIGATION OF A COGNIZABLE OFFENCE CAN BE UNDERTAKEN ONLY AFTER THE COMPLAINT IS REGISTERED UNDER SECTION 154(1) CRPC:

21. Is the exercise of power by the 3rd respondent, in forcing the petitioner to appear before him at his office on 14th and 19th November, 2013, referable to his powers of investigation under Sections 156 and 157 Cr.P.C? Commencement of investigation by a police officer is subject to two conditions, firstly the police officer should have reason to suspect the commission of a cognizable offence as required by Section 157(1), and secondly the police officer should subjectively satisfy himself that there is sufficient ground for entering on an investigation even before he starts the investigation. Clause (b) of the proviso to Section 157(1) Cr.P.C. postulates that the police officer shall draw his satisfaction only on the material placed before him at that stage, namely, the FIR together with the documents, if any, enclosed therewith, before he enters on an investigation. (Bhajan Lal2). Under Chapter XII of the CrPC, investigation consists generally of the following steps: (1) proceeding to the spot, (2) ascertainment of the facts and circumstances of the case, (3) discovery and arrest of the suspected offender, (4) collection of evidence relating to the commission of the offence which may consist of (a) the examination of various persons (including the accused) and the reduction of their statements into writing, if the officer thinks fit, (b) the search of places or seizure of things considered necessary for the investigation and to be produced at the trial, and (5) formation of the opinion as to whether, on the material collected, there is a case to place the accused before a Magistrate for trial. (H. N. Rishbud and Inder Singh v. The State of Delhi ; State of M.P. v. Mubarak Ali ; Bhagwant Kishore Joshi4; Augustine v. State ; Krishna Lal Gulati v. The State ).

22. As the main object of investigation is to bring home the offence to the offender, the essential duties of an Investigating Officer, apart from arresting the offender, is to collect all material necessary for establishing the accusation against the offender. (Bhagwant Kishore Joshi4). Conducting an investigation into an offence, after registration of the FIR under Section 154 CrPC, is the procedure established by law. The right of the accused, under Article 21 of the Constitution, is protected if the FIR is registered first, and the investigation is then conducted in accordance with law. (Lalita Kumari1).

23. A police station is defined, under Section 2(s) CrPC, to mean any post or place declared, generally or specially by the State Government, to be a police station, and includes any local area specified by the State Government in this behalf. Section 36 Cr.P.C. enables Police officers, superior in rank to an officer in charge of a police station, to exercise the same powers, throughout the local area to which they are appointed, as may be exercised by such officer within the limits of his Station. Section 154(3) enables a person aggrieved, by a refusal on the part of an officer in-charge of the police station to record the information under Section 154(1), to send the substance of such information to the Superintendent of Police who is empowered either to investigate himself, or direct an investigation to be made by any police officer subordinate to him, if the complaint discloses the commission of a cognizable offence. Even in cases where a cognizable offence has been committed, an investigation can be caused only after the complaint is registered under Section 154(1) Cr.P.C. After registration of the complaint under Section 154(1) CrPC, and during the course of investigation under Section 156 CrPC, a police officer is empowered under Section 41-A CrPC to ask the accused to appear before him by way of a notice/order in writing. In the case on hand the complaint of the 5th respondent dated 13.11.2014 was not even registered despite which the 3rd respondent directed the 4th respondent over telephone on 14.11.2013 to send the petitioner to his office, which directions the 4th respondent promptly complied by sending the petitioner, along with the Sub-Inspector of Police Sri Ajay Kumar, in a police jeep to the office of the 3rd respondent.

24. Without the complaint, given by the 5th respondent on 13.11.2014, being registered under Section 154(1) Cr.P.C the 3rd respondent could not have investigated, or to have caused an investigation, regarding the commission of cognizable offences. Even if he was satisfied that the complaint given by the 5th respondent on 13.11.2013 disclosed the commission of a cognizable offence, the 3rd respondent was statutorily obligated to have first directed that the complaint be registered under Section 154(1) Cr.P.C and only then to have caused investigation during the course of which, if need be, he could have issue a written notice to the petitioner, under Section 41-A Cr.P.C, to appear before him. An oral direction by a police officer, to the accused or a witness, to appear before him does not have statutory sanction either under Section 41-A or Section 160 CrPC. As registration of an FIR under Section 154(1) Cr.P.C. precedes investigation under Sections 156 and 157 Cr.P.C, the 3rd respondent cannot fall back on the powers of investigation, conferred on a police officer under the Code, to justify his illegal act of calling the petitioner to his office on 14th and 19th November, 2013 as the FIR was registered more than a week thereafter on 27.11.2013.

III. PRELIMINARY ENQUIRY BEFORE REGISTRATION OF THE FIR:

25. Sri R. Raghunandan, Learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the 3rd respondent, would submit that it is only after the judgment of the Supreme Court, in Lalita Kumari1, has the law, regarding registration of complaints for cognizable offences, become clear; prior thereto, it was in doubt whether or not such a complaint could be registered without a preliminary enquiry; and even in the judgment of the Supreme Court, in Lalita Kumari1, a preliminary enquiry is permissible in family disputes.
26. It is necessary, therefore, to examine whether a preliminary enquiry can be conducted before registration of the FIR, and whether the Counselling exercise undertaken by the 3rd respondent on 14th and 19th November, 2013 partakes the character of a preliminary enquiry. In Lalita Kumari1, the learned Additional Solicitor General Mr. Sidharth Luthra pointed out to the Supreme Court that throughout the country, in matrimonial, commercial, medical negligence and corruption related offences, there exist provisions for conducting an inquiry or a preliminary inquiry by the police, without/before registering an FIR under Section 154 CrPC. He relied on various police rules, prevailing in the States of Punjab, Rajasthan, U.P., Madhya Pradesh, Kolkata, Bombay, etc., for conducting an inquiry before registering an FIR, to contend that a preliminary inquiry, before registration of an FIR, should be held permissible; the power to carry out an inquiry or a preliminary inquiry by the police, which precedes registration of an FIR, will eliminate misuse of the process, as registration of FIR serves as an impediment against a person for various important activities like applying for a job or a passport, etc. (para 20 of SCC).
27. It is in this context that the Supreme Court, in Lalitha Kumari1, observed that there were instances where the power of the police to register an FIR, and initiate an investigation thereinto, were misused where a cognizable offence was not made out from the contents of the complaint; Section 498-A of the Penal Code, 1860 (in short IPC) was being misused, and a large number of frivolous reports were being lodged; the anguish expressed by the Supreme Court, in Preeti Gupta v. State of Jharkhand , had resulted in the 243rd Report of the Law Commission of India which was submitted on 30.08.2012; the Law Commission, in its report, concluded that, though the offence under Section 498-A could be made compoundable, the extent of misuse was not established by empirical data and, thus, could not be a ground to denude the provision of its efficacy (para 35 and 36 of SCC); although Section 154 CrPC postulated mandatory registration of FIRs on receipt of all cognizable offences, yet, there may be instances where a preliminary inquiry may be required owing to a change in the genesis and novelty of crimes with the passage of time, one such instance was of allegations regarding medical negligence of doctors;
it would be unfair and inequitable to prosecute a medical professional only on the basis of the allegations in the complaint (para 115 of SCC); while ensuring and protecting the rights of the accused and the complainant, the preliminary inquiry should be time-bound and, in any case, should not exceed 7 days; and the fact of such delay, and the causes of it, must be reflected in the General Diary entry (para 120.7 of SCC). (Lalita Kumari1).

28. Reference to the terms preliminary inquiry and inquiry under Sections 159, 202 and 340 of the Code, is to a judicial exercise by the Court, and not by the police. The term inquiry, under Section 2(g) of the Code, is relatable to a judicial act and not to the steps taken by the police which are either investigation after the stage of Section 154 CrPC or a preliminary inquiry prior to the registration of an FIR. Other considerations are not relevant at the stage of registration of the FIR such as, whether the information is falsely given, whether the information is genuine, whether the information is credible, etc. These are issues that have to be verified during investigation of the FIR. At the stage of registration of the FIR, all that is required to be considered is whether the information given, ex facie, discloses the commission of a cognizable offence. If, after investigation, the information given is found to be false, there is always an option to prosecute the complainant for filing a false FIR. (Lalita Kumari1).

29. Reliance placed by Sri R. Raghunandan, Learned Senior Counsel on Para 120.6 of the judgment of the Supreme Court, in Lalita Kumari1, to contend that the 3rd respondent had the power to cause a preliminary enquiry regarding the family disputes between the petitioner and his sister-the fifth respondent, and call the petitioner to the police station in the course of such preliminary enquiry, is misplaced. In Para 120.6 of the judgment, in Lalita Kumari1, the Supreme Court observed:

120.6. As to what type and in which cases preliminary inquiry is to be conducted will depend on the facts and circumstances of each case. The category of cases in which preliminary inquiry may be made are as under:
(a) Matrimonial disputes/family disputes
(b) Commercial offences
(c) Medical negligence cases
(d) Corruption cases
(e) Cases where there is abnormal delay/laches in initiating criminal prosecution, for example, over 3 months delay in reporting the matter without satisfactorily explaining the reasons for delay.
The aforesaid are only illustrations and not exhaustive of all conditions which may warrant preliminary inquiry.

30. Reference to matrimonial disputes/family disputes, in Para 120.6 of the judgment of the Supreme Court in Lalita Kumari1, is only that a preliminary enquiry may be made thereinto, and not that a police officer can resort to counselling and settlement of civil or property disputes, that too in a police station, forcing one or both the parties to appear before him thereat. The observations of the Supreme Court, in Lalitha Kumari1, that a preliminary enquiry could be conducted in matrimonial disputes/family disputes, were in the context of false and frivolous complaints being made under Sections 498 and 498-A IPC, the Dowry Prohibition Act and in the light of the judgment of the Supreme Court in Preeti Gupta9. Even in such cases a preliminary enquiry can be caused only to ascertain whether or not the complaint discloses the commission of a cognizable offence; and not to verify the veracity or otherwise of the information received. (Lalita Kumari1). In any event the premises/precincts of a police station cannot be converted into a counselling centre for resolution of such disputes.

31. The preliminary enquiry which can be made, in relation to matrimonial disputes/family disputes, is not to verify the veracity or otherwise of the information received, but only to ascertain whether the information reveals any cognizable offence (Para 120.5 of SCC). While information, which discloses the commission of a cognizable offence, is required to be mandatorily registered as an FIR under Section 154 CrPC, and no preliminary enquiry is permissible in such a situation (Para 120.1 of SCC), if the information received does not disclose a cognizable offence but indicates the necessity for an enquiry, a preliminary enquiry may be conducted only to ascertain whether a cognizable offence is disclosed or not. If the inquiry discloses the commission of a cognizable offence, the FIR must be registered. (120.2 of SCC).

32. Unlike an investigation, into the commission of a cognizable offence, which can only be initiated after the complaint is registered under Section 154(1) CrPC, a preliminary enquiry is to be caused prior to the registration of the FIR. If the accused, in the complaint registered as an FIR, can be summoned by the investigating officer, during the course of investigation, only by way of a written notice under Section 41-A Cr.P.C, it does not stand to reason that a person, against whom an FIR has not even been registered, can be orally and forcibly summoned to the Police Station or to the office of a Senior police officer. Under the guise of a preliminary enquiry, no person can be deprived of his liberty, and compelled to appear at a police station on the oral directions of a police officer without even the complaint being registered, and an investigation commenced, in accordance with the provisions of the CrPC.

IV. DO THE A.P. POLICE MANUAL AND THE CIRCULAR MEMOS ISSUED BY HIS SUPERIORS EMPOWER THE THIRD RESPONDENT TO CONDUCT COUNSELLING SESSIONS IN HIS OFFICE?

33. In his counter-affidavit, the 3rd respondent submits that the role of police officers in civil disputes, involving some amount of criminality, has been considered by the office of the Director General of Police; circulars and memorandums have been issued, in relation to these issues, from time to time; the A.P. Police Manual also prescribes guidelines relating to the exercise of power vested in police officials in the discharge of their duties; Sections 36 and 149 Cr.P.C. prescribe certain duties, and functional roles on police officers; in all the stated circulars and memos, as well as the police manual, instructions have been given to police officials not to shy away from acting on these issues when criminality is also involved; Order 322-1 specifically instructs police officials not to shirk their responsibility of protecting persons against injury or trespass, particularly when people complain of threats to their physical safety; the Circular issued by the Director General of Police dated 04.08.2012 also instructs police officials to take preventive action as stipulated under Order 322-1 of the A.P. Police Manual; his endeavour was only to ascertain the true and correct facts, in what appeared to be a family dispute, before any criminal investigation was initiated; and he had only conducted himself in accordance with the A.P. Police Manual, and the instructions issued by the higher authorities from time to time. Reliance is placed by the 3rd respondent on Standing Order No.322-I of Vol.I of the A.P. Police Manual; the circular memos of the Director General of Police dated 04.08.2012, 17.08.2012, 19.09.2012, 28.12.2012 and 31.12.2012; the memo issued to his office by the Director General of Police dated 25.11.2013 informing him of the poor performance in family counselling centres in June, 2013; the memo of the Additional Director General of Police dated 02.02.2013; the minutes of the review meeting held by the Additional Director General of Police (Co-ordination) on 23.05.2013; the memo dated 06.04.2002 issued by the Commissioner of Police regarding registration of cases under Sections 498, 498-A and the Dowry Prohibition Act; and the other memos of the Commissioner of Police dated 28.11.2011, 05.02.2013 and 09.01.2014.

34. It is necessary, therefore, to refer to the aforesaid memos and Police Standing Orders, albeit in brief. By the circular memo dated 04.08.2012, the Director General of Police informed the Superintendents of Police that police officers had abdicated their responsibility in all civil disputes, even with ingredients of criminality, on the pretext of instructions from the Chief Office, Hyderabad, and the directions of the High Court of A.P restricting police from interference with civil disputes; police officers had wrongly interpreted the directions of the High Court, and the instructions of the Chief Office; they had left such issues to be dealt with by musclemen and anti-social elements; Section 149 Cr.P.C. enjoined upon the Police to intervene in all matters where there was apprehension of the commission of a cognisable offence; Standing Order 322(1) made it abundantly clear that Police Officers could not shirk their responsibility of protecting persons against injury or trespass; Standing Order 322(1) sub-clauses A, B, C and D laid down modalities for police action in all civil disputes; the Chief Office had merely directed unscrupulous police officers to refrain from adjudicating upon the determination of property rights for pecuniary gains; and this was also true of criminal offences, besides civil disputes. All the Superintendents and Commissioners of Police were directed to instruct all police officers, subordinate to them, to take legal action by registering cases; and take preventive action etc., as stipulated under Standing Order No.322(1) of Vol.1 of the A.P. Police Manual, in all civil disputes with an element of criminality, warranting police intervention. The Regional Inspector Generals of Police and the Range DIGs were directed to ensure compliance of these instructions to prevent inaction, on the part of the police, being taken undue advantage of by the land mafia, goondas and hired criminals; ensure that no complaints, of police omission and inaction, are reported where action as per law is required; and all police officers should be disabused of the notion that civil disputes were outside their purview, and they were not entitled to take action.

35. In his circular memo dated 17.08.2012, the Director General of Police called upon the Superintendents of Police/Commissioners of Police to focus on certain issues for better delivery of services to the people, and to further improve their image. Among the issues, on which focus was required to be placed, included all civil disputes having an element of criminality which were required to be dealt with as per Standing Order No.322(1) of Volume I - Part I of the A.P. Police Manual. In his circular memo dated 19.12.2012, the Director General of Police referred to the problems, regarding access to police, being a recurring complaint. The Superintendents/Commissioners of Police were informed that a common grievances day should be observed on Monday in all districts; they must stay at headquarters/police stations on Monday, except in an emergency that too with the permission of the immediate senior officers; they should make entries of all such complaints in the complaint register, and take necessary action; and send a consolidated report, every month, in the proforma enclosed. By his memo dated 28.12.2012, the Director General of Police directed the Commissioners/Superintendents of Police to implement certain people friendly measures such as free registration of cases, holding a common grievances day each Monday, action in civil disputes etc. By his circular memo dated 31.12.2012, the Director General of Police issued instructions regarding the people friendly measures taken by police headquarters. All Superintendents of Police/Commissioners of Police were required to conduct a review and, among the measures they were directed to take, included grievance redressal within a specified time frame. All Senior Superintendents and Commissioners of Police were requested to effectively implement these measures to make the police a people friendly organisation.

36. By his Memo dated 02.02.2013, the Additional Director General of Police (Co-ordination) requested all Commissioners of Police to nominate their representatives for the meeting to be held on 12.02.2013 in his chambers to review the status of implementation of the instructions issued, through various circulars, by the DGP. All officers were directed to come prepared on several issues including the functioning of family counselling centres. On the issue of grievance redressal, the Additional Director General of Police (Co-ordination), in the review meeting held on 23.05.2013, observed that receipt of grievance petitions in Hyderabad City was poor; pendency of petitions in South Zone of Hyderabad City was high, and the Central Zone was low; all officers should improve receipt of petitions from people, dispose them of within fifteen days and, in exceptional cases, within two months; Hyderabad city had done badly in this item of work (ie., grievance redressal) as compared to other Commissionerates in the State; the Commissioners of Police at Vijayawada and Visakhapatnam should establish family counselling centres immediately; and these Centres should be run with eight highly qualified persons such as doctors, psychologists, retired Judges, retired Police Officers, academicians, NGOs etc., including Women Social Workers; functioning of family counselling centres should be regularly monitored by the Deputy Commissioners of Police; they should maintain a register with particulars of how many cases were received, how many were disposed of, and how many are pending, with reasons; if need be legal action should be initiated; issues, which were not sorted out, must be sent back to the Police Stations for registration of cases; and there was no need for serving Police Officers/men to involve themselves in the counselling session. All Commissioners of Police were advised to submit a list of members, in the Centres, in the next review meeting; maintain records of family counselling centres properly; and to contact the district authorities, dealing with the mission for elimination of urban poverty, for funds to run these family counselling centres.

37. In his memo dated 06.04.2002 the Commissioner of Police, after referring to the judgment of the Supreme Court of India in Joginder Kumar v. The State of UP , informed all SHOs, Divisional ACPs, Additional, Joint and Deputy Commissioners of Police that, with a view to avoid adverse criticism, miscarriage of justice and arbitrary deprivation of liberty of an individual, no person (either woman, man or child), should henceforth be arrested in any case registered under Sections 498 or 498-A IPC or the Dowry Prohibition Act without obtaining prior written permission from the concerned Deputy Commissioners of Police supervising investigation of the case; the concerned Inspector of Police should send a detailed report for this purpose, duly enclosing the CD file and all relevant documents, clearly placing on record the evidence available against each accused, to the concerned Deputy Commissioners of Police who should properly examine the complicity of each accused, and accord written permission to effect his/her arrest; and these instructions should be scrupulously followed. By his memo dated 28.11.2011, the Commissioner of Police, Hyderabad instructed Station House Officers to take cognizance of each complaint; they could transfer cases, to the concerned police station, if it did not pertain to their jurisdiction; nobody could drive away a complainant on the point of jurisdiction; the petitioners should not be harassed under any circumstances; and, if any such incident came to their notice, disciplinary action should be initiated against the concerned Station House Officers. By his memo dated 05.02.2013, the Commissioner of Police informed all Deputy Commissioners, Joint Commissioners and Additional Commissioners of the need to go through circulars personally, and ensure strict implementation of all the guidelines by their subordinate officers. By his memo dated 09.01.2014, the Commissioner of Police clarified that when petitioners approach superior officers to explain their grievance, and the facts of the whole story of the petition are not known to the superior officers and endorsements are made for necessary action, the entire facts and circumstances of the case should be examined and action taken only as per the facts and law; if required a report should be sent, regarding the facts, to the superior officer concerned who made the endorsement; action should not be taken which is arbitrary, one sided, or not as per law; any contravention of these instructions would be viewed seriously; and disciplinary action would be taken against the concerned.

38. The circular memos of the Director General of Police dated 04.08.2012 and 17.08.2012, asking police officers not to shirk their responsibilities in civil disputes with an element of criminality, must be read in the light of Standing Order 322-1 of the A.P. Police Manual. Standing Order No.322-1, which deals with problems arising out of Civil Disputes Duties of Police, reads as under:

Many persons approach the police for protection on account of threats to their safety due to disputes relating to property. Several complaints are also presented in writing. A good number of complaints pertain to forcible dispossession or possession of properties by use of violence or by hired goondas, or relate to matters providing religious ramifications leading to communal disturbances or where habitual land grabbers or criminal syndicates are involved etc. There are also cases wherein a group of people, when they face an immediate threat, approach the police for relief. While the police should not interfere into the disputes, which are purely of civil nature, they cannot shirk their responsibility of protecting persons against injury or trespass particularly when the people complained against are powerful or hired goondas. The following instructions are, therefore, issued for the guidance of the police officers.
A. Orders of the civil court should be implemented and all assistance should be provided to the Civil Court officials as mentioned in order
321.
B. If any civil dispute is likely to give rise to an imminent breach of peace or disturbance of public order, the police officer shall take recourse to Sections 144 to 148 Cr.P.C. as the case may be (Chapter 38, Volume II).

C. As per Section 149 CrPC every Police Officer may interpose for the purpose of preventing and shall, to the best of his ability, prevent the commission of any cognizable offence. In application of this provision, police officers shall be guided by instructions given by superior officer of the rank of SP/DCP/CP/DGP.

D. In dealing with these cases the SHO should make a contemporaneous record of every action that he takes in the general diary and in the connected file. (emphasis supplied)

39. Sections 144 to 148 CrPC, as referred to in Part B of Standing Order 322-I, relate to the powers of a Magistrate to issue orders in urgent cases of nuisance or apprehended danger (Section

144); powers of a District Magistrate to prohibit carrying arms in a procession or a mass drill or a mass training with arms (Section 144-A); powers of an Executive Magistrate where disputes concerning land or water is likely to cause breach of peace (Section

145); powers of a Magistrate to attach the subject of dispute and to appoint a receiver (Section 146); powers of an Executive Magistrate in a dispute concerning right of use of land or water (Section 147); and the powers of a District Magistrate to conduct a local enquiry (Section 148).

40. Chapter XI Cr.P.C contains provisions dealing with preventive action by the police. Section 149 enables every police officer to interpose for the purpose of preventing, and to prevent, the commission of any cognizable offence. Section 151 CrPC allows a police officer to arrest a person, even before the commission of a cognizable offence, in order to prevent the commission of that offence, if it cannot be prevented otherwise. Such preventive arrests are valid for 24 hours. (Lalita Kumari1; S. Masthan Saheb v. P.S.R. Anjaneyulu ). The conditions under which a police officer may arrest a person, without an order from a Magistrate and without a warrant, have been laid down in Section 151 CrPC. He can do so only if he has come to know of a design of the person concerned to commit any cognizable offence. A further condition for the exercise of such power, which must also be fulfilled, is that the arrest should be made only if it appears to the police officer concerned that the commission of the offence cannot be otherwise prevented. The section, therefore, expressly lays down the requirements for the exercise of the power to arrest without an order from a Magistrate and without a warrant. If these conditions are not fulfilled and a person is arrested under Section 151 CrPC, the arresting authority may be exposed to proceedings under the law. Sub-section (2) lays down the rule that normally a person so arrested shall be detained in custody not for a period exceeding 24 hours. It, therefore, follows that in the absence of anything else, on expiry of 24 hours, he must be released. Section 151 CrPC itself makes provision for the circumstances in which an arrest can be made under that Section and also places a limitation on the period for which a person so arrested may be detained. The guidelines are inbuilt in the provision itself. These statutory guidelines read with the requirements laid down by this Court in Joginder Kumar10 and D.K. Basu v. State of W.B. provide an assurance that the power shall not be abused and, in case of abuse, the authority concerned shall be adequately punished. (Ahmed Noormohmed Bhatti v. State of Gujarat ). It would be prudent for a police officer in the interest of protection of the constitutional rights of a citizen and, perhaps in his own interest, that no arrest is made without arriving at a reasonable satisfaction, after some investigation, regarding the genuineness and the bonafides of a complaint, a reasonable belief both as to the person's complicity and of the need to effect arrest. Denying a person his liberty is a serious matter. Except in heinous offences, an arrest must be avoided. It would do if a police officer issues notice to the person to attend the Police Station, and not leave the Station without permission. (Joginder Kumar10). The Police Officer, carrying out the arrest of the arrestee, should prepare a memo of arrest at the time of arrest. Such a memo should be attested by atleast one witness, counter-signed by the arrestee and should contain the time and date of the arrest. An entry must be made in the diary, at the place of detention, regarding the arrest of the person which should also disclose the name of the person who has been informed of the arrest and copies of all documents, including the memo of arrest, should be sent to the Magistrate for his record. (D.K.Basu12). If a police officer misuses his power of arrest, he can be tried and punished under Section 166 IPC. (Lalita Kumari1).

41. Even in a civil dispute with an element of criminality, such as in the case of personal injury or trespass, police officers are entitled only to take action against the criminal element of the civil dispute, and not interfere with the civil dispute itself. For instance, if the personal injury in a civil dispute attracts the ingredients of Section 354 IPC, and trespass in a civil dispute attracts the provisions of Sections 447 and 448 IPC, then the information or the complaint received must be registered under Section 154(1) Cr.P.C, as they are cognizable offences, and an investigation should only be caused thereafter. Section 41(1)(a)&(b) CrPC enable a police officer to arrest, without an order from a Magistrate and without warrant, any person who has either committed or is alleged or is suspected to have committed a cognizable offence. This power is not to be exercised for the mere asking. Section 41 Cr.P.C. requires a police officer, before arresting any person, to be satisfied that such an arrest is necessary in terms of clauses (a) to (e) of Section 41(1)(b)(ii) Cr.P.C. It also requires him to record, while making such arrest, his reasons therefor in writing. (Sambangi Dhanunjaya Naidu. v. The State of A.P. rep. by its Principal Secretary, Home Department ). Even in civil disputes with an element of criminality, while the police officer can exercise his powers under Section 41 and 41-A CrPC during the course of investigation, he cannot adjudicate or resolve property/civil disputes. The power conferred, on respondents 3 and 4, was only to take action in respect of the allegations of the 5th respondent of a threat to her life from her brother as stated in her complaint dated 13.11.2013; or her being assaulted and intimidated by her brother and his brother-in-law as stated in her complaint dated 27.11.2013; and not to forcibly resolve the property disputes between the petitioner and the 5th respondent.

42. In his statement, made before the Joint Commissioner of Police on 01.12.2013, the 3rd respondent admitted that he had endorsed the complaint, which the 5th respondent gave to him on 13.11.2013, to the 4th respondent and had asked him to call both the parties and do justice; on 14.11.2013 the Inspector of Police, Sanjeeva Reddy Nagar P.S., had sent both the parties to his office where he had counselled them, but still the family matter was not settled; then both the parties sought further time, and decided to visit his office again on 19.11.2013; on 19.11.2013, even though both the parties arrived at his office and received counselling, they still could not resolve their serious differences. In his endeavour to justify his illegal acts of summoning the petitioner to his office, and in counselling him to resolve his property disputes with the fifth respondent, the 3rd respondent places reliance on Standing Order 322-1 of the A.P. Police Manual, and the circular memos of the Director General of Police regarding family counselling centres. The 3rd respondent sought to give an impression that the steps taken by him, in seeking to resolve the property disputes between the petitioner and the 5th respondent at his office on 14th and 19th November, 2013, is a family Counselling exercise.

43. On being asked why a memo dated 25.11.2013 was issued to the Deputy Commissioner, West Zone, regarding poor performance in family counselling centres in June, 2013, Learned Government Pleader for Home placed before this Court a copy of the Circular memo dated 21.02.2013 regarding establishment of family counselling centres in all Districts. By the said circular memo dated 21.02.2013, the Director General of Police informed all Commissioners/Superintendents of Police that the need of the hour was to establish a family counselling centre, at a centrally located place in the district, to provide easy access to the common people to solve their family issues; the family counselling centres should be constituted with experts from different fields, like representatives from Women & Child Welfare department, Municipal Corporation, retired Judges, NGOs, social activists, academics, retired police officers, Women organizations etc; and police officers should only have an advisory role as experts in such counselling centres, in addition to providing them logistics. All Commissioners and Superintendents of Police were directed to establish family counselling centres in the district/towns with immediate effect.

44. The circular memo dated 21.02.2013, issued by the Director General of Police, confers only an advisory role on serving police officers besides providing logistical support to the experts in these family counselling centres. These family counselling centres were required to be established at a centrally located place involving experts in different fields including retired judges, social workers, retired police officers etc. On a reading of the circular memo dated 21.02.2013 it is clear that police stations are not meant to be treated as family counselling centres, and serving police officers should not resort to family counselling, much less at their office or at a police station. The minutes, of the review meeting held on 23.05.2013, records the clarification of the Additional Director General of Police (Co-ordination) that there was no need for serving police officers to involve themselves in counselling sessions. It is evident, therefore, that not only has the 3rd respondent acted illegally and highhandedly in forcing the petitioner to come to the S.R.Nagar police station, and then in a police jeep to his office, but he has also sought to mislead this court that the counselling sessions at his office, on 14th and 19th November, 2013, has the sanction of the A.P. Police Manual Standing Orders and the circular memos referred to hereinabove.

V. THE POLICE RECORDS DO NOT CONTAIN ANY ENTRY REGARDING THE COUNSELLING SESSIONS CONDUCTED BY THE 3RD RESPONDENT AT HIS OFFICE ON 14TH AND 19TH NOVEMBER, 2013:

45. Principles of democracy and liberty demand a regular and efficient check on police powers. One way of keeping check is by documenting every action of theirs. A police station is required to maintain several records including the Case Diary under Section 172 CrPC; a General Diary under Section 44 of the Police Act, etc. which help in documenting every information collected, the spot visited and all other actions and activities of police officers. Under the CrPC, all actions of the police are written and documented. For example, in the case of arrest under Section 41(1)(b) of the Code, the arrest memo along with the grounds should be, mandatorily, in writing; under Section 55 CrPC, if an officer is deputed to make an arrest, then the superior officer should write down and record the offence, etc. for which the person is to be arrested; under Section 91 CrPC, a written order has to be passed, by the officer concerned, to seek documents; under Section 160 of the Code, a written notice has to be issued to the witness so that he can be called for recording of his/her statement; a seizure memo/panchnama has to be drawn for every article seized. (Lalita Kumari1); and, under Section 41-A(1), the police officer shall, in all cases where the arrest of a person is not required under Section 41(1), issue a notice directing the person, against whom a complaint of having committed a cognizable offence has been made, to appear before him.

46. The term General Diary (also called as Station Diary or Daily Diary in some States) is maintained not under Section 154 of the Code, but under Section 44 of the Police Act, 1861 in the States to which it applies, or under the respective provisions of the Police Act(s) applicable to a State or under the Police Manual of a State, as the case may be. (Lalita Kumari1). The General Diary is a record of all important transactions/events taking place in a police station, including departure and arrival of police staff, handing over or taking over of charge, arrest of a person, details of law and order duties, visit of senior officers, etc. In addition the gist of the FIR, or its substance, is also mentioned simultaneously in the General Diary since registration of FIR also happens to be an important event in the police station. (Lalita Kumari1).

47. A copy of the General Diary is not sent to the Judicial Magistrate, having jurisdiction over the police station, though its copy is sent to a superior police officer. It is not possible to keep a strict control of each and every FIR recorded in the General Diary by superior police officers, and/or court, in view of several other details being mentioned therein. There is no requirement of obtaining the signature of the complainant in the General Diary. What is recorded in the General Diary cannot be considered to be the fulfilment of, or compliance with, the requirement of Section 154 CrPC regarding registration of the FIR. However, since the General Diary/Station Diary/Daily Diary is the record of all information received in a police station, all information relating to cognizable offences, whether resulting in registration of the FIR or leading to an inquiry, must be mandatorily and meticulously reflected in the said diary, and the decision to conduct a preliminary inquiry must also be reflected therein. (Lalita Kumari1).

48. The General Diary Register of S.R. Nagar Police Station, from 20.09.2013 till 30.11.2013, has been placed before this Court. The G.D. entry, dated 27.11.2013 at 20.00 hours, records receipt of FIR No.936 of 2013, for offences under Sections 323, 506 and 509 IPC, and reads as under:-

At this time received a complaint from Smt.Reena Choudary W/o.late Ranjith Kumar, age 34 years, Occ: House wife, R/o.Flat No.203, Jaya Residency, Asmangadh, New Malakpet, Hyderabad in which she states that on 10.11.2013 at about 22.00 hours, while she along with DVS Ramanjaneyulu were returning from Kukatpally, when they reached at SR Nagar, in the mean time, her brother Garikapati Binod Chand Raj Gopal and his brother-in-law forcibly stopped their vehicle and they threatened her with dire consequence by slapping her. When she shouted they sped away from the spot. Later she mentioned that her brother promised to give her share of property and after the death of her father he failed to do so by keeping property documents with him and she was been threatened by her brother and his associates when she asked about her share in the property. Registered a case in Cr.No.936/13 U/s.323, 506, 509 IPC and took up investigation.
49. Curiously the General Diary Register makes no mention of either the representation submitted by the 5th respondent to the 3rd respondent on 13.11.2013, or to the petitioner being brought to the S.R. Nagar police station on 14.11.2013 or his being taken from there in a police jeep to the office of the 3rd respondent. No record also appears to have been maintained regarding the Counselling Sessions (which the petitioner was forced to participate) held, at the office of the DCP, West Zone, by the 3rd respondent on 14th and 19th November, 2014. But for the intervention of this Court, the counselling sessions at the office of the DCP, West Zone on 14th and 19th November, 2013 would have gone unnoticed and unchecked.
VI. POWER OF ADJUDICATION OF CIVIL/PROPERTY DISPUTES IS CONFERRED ONLY ON THE JUDICIARY AND NOT ON POLICE OFFICERS:

50. Maintenance of peace and public order, prevention of crime and investigation of cognizable offences are functions which Police Officers are, statutorily, obligated to discharge. While Section 154(1) Cr.P.C confers power, and casts a duty, on the police officer to register a cognizable offence, Section 155 Cr. P.C. enables a police officer to make an entry in the appropriate register, regarding information relating to a non-cognizable offence. He cannot investigate a non-cognizable offence without the order of the Magistrate. As a necessary corollary, any attempt by a police officer to investigate a complaint, which does not contain allegations of the commission of a cognizable offence, without permission from the Magistrate would violate Section 155(2) Cr.
P.C and is, ex facie, illegal. There is no presumption in law that every rift in human relations would lead to a civil dispute, and a civil dispute is likely to result in clashes resulting in offences against the human body. A Police Officer would not be justified in saying that he/she is examining a complaint which, ex facie, has the trappings of a civil dispute. (S. Masthan Saheb11). Even if a civil dispute has a criminal element, which falls within the ambit of a cognizable offence, with the potential of a law and order problem posing threat to the society at large, a Police Officer can take up investigation only after registering the complaint under Section 154 Cr.P.C. (Lakshmi @ Lakshmamma v. Commissioner of Police ).

51. The function of resolving civil disputes is entrusted to the judiciary. Police officers lack jurisdiction to interfere in civil/property disputes between two citizens. Even in criminal case, their role is limited to the registration of complaints and causing investigation. The power to adjudge whether or not an accused is guilty of having committed a criminal offence, and to convict and sentence him therefor, is vested exclusively in the judicial branch of the State. Judicial power cannot be exercised by agencies outside the judicial orbit and, where there is no legislative foundation for exercise of judicial power by a forum, it has no legal capacity to entertain requests for adjudication. Judicial power is a facet of sovereign power and can be conferred only by a Statute or by a Statutory instrument. It cannot be assumed suo motu. No authority may exercise adjudicatory powers absent a conferment of such powers by Statutory instruments. The coercive power of the State may not be employed to adjudicate disputes. (M/s. Janathaeem Industries Ltd., rep., by its Public Relations Officer M.S. Ganesan, Vijayawada. v. The District Collector, Krishna district at Vijayawada ).

52. While the inordinate delay, in resolution of civil disputes before Civil Courts of competent jurisdiction, is undoubtedly a cause of concern that does not justify Police Officers exercising powers, conferred exclusively of the judicial branch of the State, to adjudicate civil disputes. While the need to strengthen judicial institutions, and to reduce the inordinate delay in disposal of Civil Suits, cannot be over-emphasised, the highhanded acts of police officers in seeking to resolve civil disputes, that too in the precincts of a police station, must also be sternly dealt with. Just as Courts would not undertake investigation of criminal offences, as these are matters in the exclusive realm of the investigating agency, the powers conferred and the duties cast upon Police Officers, under the Criminal Procedure Code, is only to register complaints regarding cognizable offences and investigate thereinto; and not adjudicate even criminal cases, much less resort to settlement of civil disputes.

53. Police officers should not usurp, or even seem to usurp, judicial functions of adjudication or to summon and force persons to resolve their inter-se civil disputes in a particular manner under the guise of family counselling. In the present case the 3rd respondent has, in effect, donned the robes of a judge in adjudicating property disputes between the petitioner and the 5th respondent.

VII. CONTRADICTIONS IN THE STATEMENTS MADE BY THE FIFTH RESPONDENT FROM TIME TO TIME:

54. The contradictions in the complaint of the 5th respondent, on which the 3rd respondent had endorsed on 13.11.2013; her subsequent complaint dated 27.11.2013 which resulted in registration of Crime No.936 of 2013; and her assertions in the counter-affidavit filed before this Court; must also be noted. In her representation given to the 3rd respondent on 13.11.2013, the 5th respondent alleged that, on her asking him to divide their properties, her brother (the petitioner) and his brother-in-law had threatened to kill her; both of them had also threatened that, if she did not vacate the flat in Jaya Residency, they would kill her; her brother, his brother-in-law Raju and one Sivarao came inside her house and disconnected water supply; and even at Jaya Nagar, where she was staying, the petitioner, his brother-in-law and Sivarao had threatened to kill her. It is relevant to note that the representation of the 5th respondent, on which the 3rd respondent endorsed to the 4th respondent on 13.11.2013 asking him to do justice, makes no mention of an incident which allegedly took place three days prior thereto on 10.11.2013, though in her complaint dated 27.11.2013 the 5th respondent stated that, on 10.11.2013 at about 2200 hours, while she along with Sri DVS Ramanjaneyulu were returning from Kukatpally and had reached S.R. Nagar, her brother and his brother-in-law forcibly stopped their vehicle; threatened her with dire consequences, and slapped her; and she was being threatened by her brother and his associates as and when she asked him about her share in the property.

55. In her statement to the Joint Commissioner on 01.12.2013 the 5th respondent, while referring to the incident on 10.11.2013 at 10.00 p.m., only alleged that the petitioners brother-in-law Sri Raju had pulled her aside, and had slapped her; and her brother (the petitioner) had threatened her with dire consequences, with regards the property disputes. The statement of the 5th respondent, recorded by the Joint Commissioner of Police on 01.12.2013, makes no mention of her being assaulted by her brother on 10.11.2013. In her counter-affidavit before this Court, the 5th respondent stated that, on 10.11.2013 at 10.00 p.m, the petitioner and his brother-in-law had stopped their vehicle; the petitioners brother-in-law had slapped her, and her brother had beaten her black and blue.

56. The contradictions, in the statements made from time to time by the 5th respondent, do give an impression that a concocted complaint was hurriedly registered on 27.11.2013, after the petitioner had invoked the jurisdiction of this Court by way of the present Writ Petition on 26.11.2013, and after a copy of the Writ Petition was furnished to the office of the Government Pleader, High Court on the same day, only to avoid being faulted by this Court. As Crime No.936 of 2013, registered with S.R.Nagar Police Station on 27.11.2013, has, thereafter, been transferred to Central Crime Station, Hyderabad and re-registered as Crime No.182 of 2013, I refrain from saying anything more.

57. In his statement, before the Joint Commissioner on 01.12.2013, the 3rd respondent stated that the 5th respondent met him on 13th November, 2013 and had informed him that her brother and his brother-in-law had attacked them on 10.11.2013 at S.R.Nagar traffic signals; and he had endorsed the complaint to the fourth respondent asking him to call both parties and do justice. However the said complaint which the 5th respondent gave him, and on which he had made an endorsement to the 4th respondent on 13.11.2013, makes no mention of any incident having taken place on 10.11.2013, much less at Sanjeeva Reddy Nagar. Neither the 2nd respondent nor the Joint Commissioner of Police who conducted the enquiry have examined why an incident which allegedly took place on 10.11.2013, and forms the basis of registration of Crime No.936 of 2013 dated 27.11.2013, does not find mention in the 5th respondents representation given to the 3rd respondent on 13.11.2013, three days after the alleged incident on 10.11.2013. In his counter-affidavit filed before this Court, the 4th respondent states that he was telephonically instructed by the 3rd respondent not to register the complaint of the 5th respondent containing the endorsement of the 3rd respondent on 13.11.2013; and that he was asked by the 3rd respondent over telephone on 14.11.2013 to produce the petitioner before him at the office of the DCP, West Zone. It is disconcerting that, though the 3rd respondent admitted that he endorsed the complaint of the 5th respondent to the 4th respondent on 13.11.2013, the Joint Commissioner of Police should choose not to examine the 4th respondent or record his statement during the course of his enquiry.

VIII. PROPERTY DISPUTES BETWEEN THE PETITIONER AND THE FIFTH RESPONDENT ARE MATTERS TO BE ADJUDICATED BY A COMPETENT CIVIL COURT AND SHOULD NOT BE EXAMINED IN PROCEEDINGS UNDER ARTICLE 226 OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA:

58. In her counter-affidavit, the 5th respondent narrates in detail the property disputes between her and her brother (the petitioner);
she also claims that her brother forcibly vacated her from the flat where she was residing till August, 2008 and had put her in the house at plot No.49, Andhra Bank Colony with the intention of occupying all the flats; whenever he came to India he used to harass, abuse and beat her and ask her to sign on some documents to extinguish her legal rights over the properties; she had refused to do so; unable to bear his harassment, she had left his house and was staying in a rented house till May, 2013; since she is entitled for three flats in the complex, she had taken possession of flat Nos.101 and 102 and had given them on rent since September, 2013; when her brother came to know that she had occupied flat No.203, and had given flat Nos.101 and 102 on rent, he had sent his brother-in-law Sri G. Balraj who beat her, and slapped her minor daughter; and though she gave a police complaint, the 4th respondent stated that it was a civil dispute and could not be entertained. The affidavit details the claim of the 5th respondent to her share of the property. The 5th respondent alleges that the petitioner had suppressed relevant facts with regards property disputes; he had not paid maintenance and water charges for the five flats in his occupation; he is keeping all the original property documents with him, and did not want to give her legal share; and, as she was demanding her share of the properties, he has been harassing her with the aid and support of his brother-in-law. The 5th respondent narrates in detail her property disputes, and claims that the petitioner is seeking to deprive her of her just share of their ancestral property.

59. As the proper forum for adjudication of the property disputes, between the petitioner and the 5th respondent, is the Civil Court of competent jurisdiction, it would be wholly inappropriate for this Court, in proceedings under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, to examine much less determine the validity of the rival claims, of the petitioner and the 5th respondent, over their ancestral properties. It is made clear that, in case either the petitioner or the fifth respondent invoke the jurisdiction of the competent Civil Court, their respective claims shall be adjudicated on its merits without being influenced by any observations made in this Order. IX. OTHER CONTENTIONS:

60. It is the case of the 3rd respondent that the statement made by the petitioner before the Joint Commissioner on 01.12.2013 contradicts the allegations made by him in para 15 of the Writ Petition; in his statement the petitioner himself stated that he was not asked to sign any papers or any documents on 19.11.2013; and that no such incident took place is evident from the report of the Joint Commissioner of Police, and the report of the Committee.

61. In his statement, before Jt.CP (Admn.) on 01.12.2013, the petitioner stated that, on 14th of November, 2013 at around 1.00 PM, he received a call from Sri Ajay Kumar, Sub-Inspector Sanjeeva Reddy Nagar PS who asked him to come to the Police Station in connection with a complaint lodged by his sister; in response thereto, he went to the Police Station in a car; after he met the Sub-Inspector Sri Ajay Kumar, he was called to the chambers of the Inspector Sri Prabhakar who informed him that a complaint had been lodged by his sister and asked him to accompany the Sub-Inspector in the police jeep to the office of the DCP, West Zone, which he did; his car followed him to the office of the DCP, West Zone; he spent ten minutes with the 3rd respondent in his chambers where his sister and another were present; the 3rd respondent informed him that, though a complaint was lodged by his sister against him, he was not being treated as an accused; he was offered a chair; he was also informed that the complaint was about his threatening his sister; he was asked by the 3rd respondent to meet him again; on 19.11.2013 he received a call on his phone No.8096102190 from the office of the Deputy Commissioner of Police, West Zone; when he reached the office at about 2.45 pm he found persons not known to him in the office; his sister later appeared in the office of the DCP West Zone and raised the issue of property, alleging that he was not giving her property; his father had passed away without leaving behind any will; her share of the property had already been given to his sister, at the time of her marriage; whenever he came to India, he was being subjected to severe mental stress by his sisters tormenting words, asking for her share of the property; he was advised by people in the chambers of the DCP, West Zone to settle the property issue, as soon as possible, in accordance with the wishes of his sister; he was asked to be prepared to sign agreements of settlement to that effect; he was, however, not shown the papers or documents on which to sign; no one had manhandled him and no vulgar language was used; but he was pressurized that, if he did not settle the matter with his sister, he may enter into problems/cases related to property disputes as well as criminal cases out of his sisters complaints that he was harassing her; he left the office at about 9.30 pm; on 25th November, 2013, at about 4.30 P.M, a constable visited the house of his father-in-law at Marredpally, where he had been staying with his family since a few days; he was away and came to know later that the constable had asked for him, in connection with his sisters complaint at Sanjeeva Reddy Nagar PS, and had waited there upto 10 PM.

62. Even before the Joint Commissioner the petitioner stated that he was asked to be prepared to sign agreement of settlement of properties but was not shown the papers or documents on which to sign. He also stated that he was threatened that, if he did not settle the matter with his sister, he may face criminal cases out of his sisters complaint; and he was at the office of the 3rd respondent till 9.30 P.M. on 19th November, 2013. This Writ Petition was filed on 26.11.2013, the day next to 25.11.2013 when a constable is said to have asked for him.

X. CONCLUSION:

63. In his additional affidavit, the 3rd respondent states that an adverse memo dated 10.12.2013 has already been issued to him by the Commissioner of Police; he was also facing disciplinary action by the Government; several daily newspapers have made adverse reports against him with reference to the observations of the Court repeatedly; these facts were, inadvertently, missed in the earlier counter affidavit; and if this counter affidavit is not taken on record, and considered along with the earlier counter affidavit, he would suffer irreparable loss and injury. The 3rd respondent offers his unconditional apology if he has transgressed his limits in the course of his interaction with the petitioner and the 5th respondent.

64. While the 3rd respondent, in his statement before the Joint Commissioner, admits that both parties (the petitioner and the 5th respondent) received counselling at his office, he does not even state what the exercise of Counselling involved, and whether it related to resolution of property disputes between the petitioner and the 5th respondent. In the counter-affidavit filed before this Court, the 5th respondent admits that the 3rd respondent had counselled her and her brother regarding settlement of the property disputes. It is clear that the 3rd respondent has not only forced the petitioner to come to his office, but has also resorted to settlement of property disputes under the guise of family counselling. In asking the 4th respondent not to register the complaint given by the 5th respondent to the 3rd respondent on 13.11.2013, in orally summoning the petitioner to his office (office of the DCP, West Zone), in forcing him to come to his office on 14th and 19th November, 2013, and in counselling him at his office both on 14th and 19th November, 2013, the petitioners fundamental right of personal liberty, under Article 21 of the Constitution of India, has been violated by the 3rd respondent.

65. No person can be forcibly summoned to a police station except in accordance with law, including the provisions of the CrPC. Exercise of power by police officers, and the mode and manner of its exercise, is circumscribed by the provisions of the CrPC. Conferment of power is only to enable police officers to effectively discharge their statutory/legal obligations. Exercise of power, otherwise than in furtherance of a statutory/legal duty, is an abuse of power. In the present case, not only does the 3rd respondent lack the power to summon the petitioner to the police station, even without registering the complaint and without a written notice asking him to appear, he has also abused his office in carrying on a counselling session within the premises of the office of the DCP, West Zone, that too for resolution of a civil dispute regarding division of property between the petitioner and the 5th respondent.

66. The belated and half-hearted apology tendered by the 3rd respondent, with a rider that his apology was if he had transgressed his limits in the course of interacting with the petitioner or the 5th respondent, does not commend acceptance. It is not even the case of the 3rd respondent that the petitioner had voluntarily, and on his own accord, come to the S.R.Nagar Police Station on 14.11.2013 or that he had on his volition and free will, and without being directed by the police officers at S.R.Nagar P.S, come over to the office of the D.C.P., West Zone, to meet the 3rd respondent on 14.11.2013. Neither has the 3rd respondent admitted that his action in telephonically instructing the 4th respondent to direct the petitioner to come to S.R.Nagar Police Station, and to produce him at the office of the DCP, West Zone for counselling on 14th November, 2013 and in directing the petitioner to appear before him on 19th November, 2013 is illegal, nor has he assured this Court that he would refrain from indulging in such acts in future. I see no reason, therefore, to accept the apology of the 3rd respondent which is, evidently, made only to avoid being faulted by this Court. The illegal and high-handed acts of the 3rd respondent, depriving the petitioner of his fundamental right of personal liberty under Article 21 of the Constitution of India, cannot be ignored. The competent authority shall forthwith initiate major penalty proceedings against the 3rd respondent, conduct a departmental enquiry, and take disciplinary action in accordance with law. The entire exercise, culminating in a final order being passed by the competent authority, shall be completed within four months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order. This order shall not preclude the petitioner from claiming damages, for the violation of his fundamental rights by the 3rd respondent, in duly instituted legal proceedings.

67. While the 4th respondent cannot absolve himself of all blame on the specious plea that he had merely acted on the orders of the 3rd respondent, this Court must also bear in mind that the 4th respondent has, in his counter-affidavit filed before this Court, narrated the sequence of the events but for which the illegal and high-handed acts of the 3rd respondent may not have been established. The 4th respondent must constantly remind himself that his foremost obligation is to uphold the rule of law, notwithstanding the illegal orders of his superiors. It would suffice to warn the 4th respondent to desist from indulging in such acts in future.

68. This Court has only examined the illegal and high-handed acts of the 3rd respondent in orally summoning and counselling the petitioner at his office, to settle his property disputes with the 5th respondent, without even registering the complaint of the 5th respondent under Section 154(1) CrPC; and has not touched upon the property disputes between the petitioner and the fifth respondent. It is made clear that, while investigation in Crime No.182 of 2013 may be conducted in accordance with law and a final report submitted under Section 173 CrPC, the 3rd respondent shall not be involved either directly or indirectly in investigation or be consulted in the preparation and finalisation of the final report.

69. The Writ Petition is, accordingly, allowed with exemplary costs of Rs.10,000/- (Rupees Ten Thousand only). The costs should, ordinarily, have been paid to the petitioner. However, as he is employed in the U.S.A, and the genesis of this dispute is an internecine fight over vast extents of property, it is but appropriate that the cost of Rs.10,000/- is paid by the 3rd respondent to the Andhra Pradesh State Legal Services Authority, Hyderabad, within four weeks from the date of receipt of a copy of this Order. The miscellaneous petitions, if any pending, are also disposed of.

_______________________________ (RAMESH RANGANATHAN, J) Date: .04.2014.
[Copy case text here]
================================================================================


================================================================================
CASE 18:
[Cites 53, Cited by 2]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
G.B.C.Raj Gopal vs The Government Of A.P. Rep., By The ... on 24 April, 2014
Author: Ramesh Ranganathan
Bench: Ramesh Ranganathan
       

  

  

 
 
 THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE RAMESH RANGANATHAN             

WRIT PETITION NO.34137 of 2013    

24-04-2014 

G.B.C.Raj Gopal.Petitioner     

The Government of A.P. rep., by the Principal Secretary, Home Department,
Secretariat Buildings, Secretariat, Hyderabad, A.P. and six others..Respondents

Counsel for the petitioner: Mr. Mohd. Shafiuddin

Counsel for respondents: Government Pleader for Home; 
            Sri M. Karunasagar;
            Sri R. Raghunandan, Senior Counsel for P. Shreyas Reddy;
            Sri D. Srinivas.
<GIST:  

>HEAD NOTE:    

?Citations:

1)      (2014) 2 SCC 1 
2)      1992 Supp (1) SCC 335  
3)      (2013) Cri.L.J. 776 (SC)
4)      AIR 1964 SC 221  
5)      AIR 1955 SC 196  
6)      AIR 1959 SC 707  
7)      1982 Cri.L.J 1557 (Kerala HC FB)
8)      1976 Cri.L.J 1825 (All HC-Lucknow Bench) 
9)      (2010) 7 SCC 667 
10)     (1994) 4 SCC 260 
11)     2002(2) AnW.R. 582 = 2002(2) ALD (Crl). 706 (A.P).
12)     AIR 1997 SC 610  
13)       (2005) 3 SCC 647 
14)       Judgment in W.P.No.523 of 2014 dated 21.01.2014  
15)       2004(4) ALT 175
16)     Judgment in W.P. No.13391 of 2006 dated 14.07.2006  


THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE RAMESH RANGANATHAN             

WRIT PETITION No.34137 OF 2013    

ORDER:
The action of respondents 3 and 4, in calling and pressurizing the petitioner to subscribe his signature to the already prepared documents without disclosing the contents thereof; in threatening to implicate him in criminal cases if he failed to do so; and in forcing him to yield to the illegal demands of the 5th respondent giving up his right, title share and interest in the devolved properties; is questioned in this Writ Petition as being arbitrary and illegal. The petitioner and the fifth respondent are siblings. The Deputy Commissioner of Police, West Zone, Hyderabad is the 3rd respondent, and the Inspector of Police, Sanjeeva Reddy Nagar P.S. is the 4th respondent. The 3rd respondent is arrayed as respondent No.6 eo-nominee, and the 4th respondent is arrayed as respondent No.7 eo-nominee. They shall, hereinafter, be referred to as respondents 3 and 4 respectively.

2. The petitioner, a software engineer and a green card holder, claims to have come to Hyderabad from the U.S.A. on 11.09.2013. It is his case that his sister (the 5th respondent),who was staying in Malakpet, had approached S.R. Nagar police station claiming to be a resident of Ameerpet; Sri Ajit Kumar, the Sub-Inspector of Police, S.R. Nagar police station had called him over the telephone at 1.00 p.m. on 14.11.2013, and had asked him to come to the police station; the 4th respondent-Inspector of Police did not show him the complaint lodged by the 5th respondent or divulge its contents; he was taken in a police jeep, from S.R. Nagar police station, to the office of the DCP - West Zone at A.C. Guards; he was directed to make himself available again, at the office of the Deputy Commissioner of Police, West Zone, on 19.11.2013 at 2.45 pm; when he went there on 19.11.2013, the 3rd respondent informed him that a complaint was lodged against him by the 5th respondent with the S.R. Nagar police station; it was not necessary to disclose the contents of the complaint to him, and he should effect a settlement and divide the properties with his sister i.e., the 5th respondent; he informed the 3rd respondent that neither had he committed any offence nor were there any questionable antecedents against him, except the alleged complaint said to have been lodged by the 5th respondent with the S.R. Nagar police station; he could not be asked to make himself available at the office of the 3rd respondent more so for division of properties, between him and the 5th respondent, which was a civil dispute in which the police had no right to interfere; the 5th respondent, who was present in the office of the 3rd respondent, started demanding that he give up his right, interest and share in certain flats and other properties; when he declined, the 3rd respondent asked him to affix his signature on prepared documents and stamp papers; when he demanded to know its contents, the 3rd respondent sternly instructed him to obey orders and do as he was told, otherwise criminal cases would be instituted preventing him from leaving the country to proceed back to the USA; he was subjected to various pressures and turmoils at the hands of the 5th respondent, and her henchmen; as he had offered resistance, the 5th respondent was surreptitiously putting the office of the 3rd respondent to use, meting out threats of implicating him in false criminal cases, in the event he refused to yield to her illegal demands that he give up his share and entitlement in the devolved properties; the 3rd respondent had asked him to leave his office and return at 11.00 am on 23.11.2013 after making up his mind on signing the documents that would be produced on that day; he was asked not to divulge these events to any one outside the office; he did not bring these facts to the notice of higher police authorities fearing a back lash from the 3rd respondent; and the action of respondents 3 and 4 is illegal and unauthorised, and has resulted in violation of his fundamental rights.

3. This Writ Petition was filed in the High Court Registry on 26.11.2013 after a copy thereof was served on the office of the Government Pleader in the High Court. The Writ Petition was listed before this Court on 28.11.2013 and, in view of the serious allegations made against a senior officer in the cadre of Deputy Commissioner of Police, the matter was directed to be listed the next day i.e., 29.11.2013 to enable the Learned Government Pleader for Home to obtain instructions. On 29.11.2013, the Learned Government Pleader for Home placed before this Court the records including a copy of FIR No.936 of 2013 dated 27.11.2013 registered with the S.R. Nagar police station, against the petitioner, for offences under Sections 323, 506 and 509 IPC. Section 323 IPC relates to voluntarily causing hurt and is a non-cognizable offence. Section 506 IPC, which relates to criminal intimidation, is also a non-cognizable offence. Section 509 IPC relates to an offence of insulting the modesty of any woman etc, and is a cognizable offence.

4. In its proceedings dated 29.11.2013, this Court noted that the records placed before it contained a copy of the complaint given by the 5th respondent which did not bear any date, but contained an endorsement of having been received on 27.11.2013 at 22.00 hours. This Court was, prima facie, of the view that, when the Writ Petition was filed on 26.11.2013, the petitioner could not have visualized that a complaint would be lodged against him by his sister on the next day i.e., 27.11.2013 at 22.00 hours that too at S.R. Nagar police station against whose officials he had levelled grave and serious allegations in the Writ affidavit; it defied reason that the 5th respondent should give a complaint late at night at 22.00 hours on 27.11.2013 for an incident which allegedly took place more than a fortnight prior thereto on 10.11.2013, if it were for reasons other than the Writ Petition having been filed before this Court; prima facie, it appeared that a concocted complaint was hurriedly registered on the night of 27.11.2013 as the Writ Petition was to be listed before this Court on 28.11.2013; if, as was sought to be made out by the 4th respondent, such an incident had taken place on 10.11.2013 no efforts were made by respondents 3 and 4 to ascertain why the 5th respondent chose to remain silent for more than a fortnight; and if, on the other hand, an oral complaint was made by the 5th respondent on 10.11.2013, it should have been reduced into writing under Section 154 Cr.P.C immediately thereafter.

5. The 2nd respondent was directed to cause an enquiry into the incident and submit a report to this Court by 02.12.2013; forthwith transfer investigation of the complaint from S.R. Nagar police station; entrust investigation to any other police officer, not subordinate to the 3rd respondent; and consider whether respondents 3 and 4 should be permitted to remain in active duty pending further enquiry. Interim stay was granted. The records, relating to FIR No.936 of 2013, were called for from the III Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Nampally, to whom the said FIR had been forwarded by the SR Nagar police station and the records, placed before it, were directed to be kept in a sealed cover with the High Court Registry.

6. In compliance with the order of this Court dated 29.11.2013, the 2nd respondent-Commissioner of Police had an enquiry caused by the Joint Commissioner of Police. In his enquiry report dated 05.12.2013, the Joint Commissioner of Police has observed that the 5th respondent is a widow and an orphan surviving on rents received from the Flats left behind by her deceased parents at Jaya Residency, Malakpet, Hyderabad; the petitioner, her brother and sole sibling, lives in the USA; since the death of their father in the year, 2000 they have been unable to reach an understanding over sharing of properties left behind by their deceased parents; they had involved others in their quarrel, with the petitioners brother- in-law on his side and Sri Ramanjaneyulu on the side of the 5th respondent; having gained no positive result the 5th respondent, to save her family reputation and avoid lodging a police case against her brother, had approached the 3rd respondent seeking his counselling; she had, subsequently, made 3 to 4 visits to the office of the Deputy Commissioner of Police, West Zone; the 3rd respondent had arranged counselling, for both the parties, atleast on two occasions; no amicable solution could, however, be reached as the petitioner disappeared from the office of the DCP West Zone; the 5th respondent changed her mind, and decided to lodge a formal complaint in S.R. Nagar police station on 27.11.2013 mentioning the attack on her at S.R. Nagar Signals on 10.11.2013 at 22.00 hours; on the basis of this complaint, Cr. No.936 of 2013 was registered at S.R. Nagar Police Station on 27.11.2013 at 20.00 hours; on receipt of the letter of the Government Pleader for Home dated 29.11.2013, communicating the order of this Court, the case was transferred to CCS, Hyderabad on 30.11.2013, before any tangible progress was made in investigation by the S.R.Nagar P.S; on receipt of a fax message from the Commissioner of Police, Hyderabad on 30.11.2013, the case was re-registered in Central Crime Station as Cr. No.181 of 2013 under the same sections of law, and investigation is in progress.

7. In its order dated 11.12.2013, this Court noted that the records of the Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate disclosed that the complaint was received in his Court at 4.00 p.m., on 28.11.2013 after this Court, by its proceedings dated 28.11.2013, had granted time to the Learned Government Pleader to obtain instructions, and had posted the matter for hearing on 29.11.2013; and the FIR Index Register disclosed the possibility of FIR No.936 of 2013 being ante-dated. As it was, prima facie, of the view that a false criminal case was manufactured only because the petitioner chose to invoke its jurisdiction, this Court called for a report from the 1st respondent as to what action needed to be taken against respondents 3 and 4 for their highhanded and illegal acts of resorting to settlement of private civil disputes. Respondents 3 and 4 were impleaded as respondents 6 and 7 eo- nominee.

8. In his report to this Court, the first respondent-Principal Secretary, Home stated that, pursuant to the instructions issued by Government vide Memo No.37993/PSC/A3/13, dt.23.12.2013 for an enquiry by a Committee, which was constituted for monitoring and enquiry into complaints on Police interference in Civil disputes and recommend action on erring Police personnel, the Director General of Police, by his letter dated 31.12.2013, had furnished the report of the said enquiry committee which disclosed that the parties in W.P.No.34137 of 2013 were examined and their statements recorded, except that of the petitioner as he had returned to the USA. The Committee was of the view that there was inordinate delay in dispatch of the FIR in Cr.No.936/2013 to the Court; the FIR was received in the court at 4.00 PM on 28.11.2013; on perusal of DSR of West Zone for 27.11.2013, which was received by all committee members on 28.11.2013 before 6.00 AM, Cr.No.936 of 2013 found mention, thereby establishing that Cr.No.936 of 2013 was registered on 27.11.2013 at 22.00 hours; the Committee perused the petition of R-5 dated 13.11.2013, and had noticed that there had been an attempt to change the place of residence of the petitioner from Jaya Residency to Jaya Nagar by striking off the word residency in telugu and adding the word nagar in telugu; their enquiries further revealed that there is no Jaya Nagar in Ameerpet area; the Committee found fault with the endorsement CI, SR Nagar Call both the parties and do justice to the deserved of the DCP, West Zone upon the petition of R-5, dated 13.11.2013; it also faulted the DCP, West Zone for not registering a case in immediate response to the petition of R-5 and, instead, calling the Writ Petitioner repeatedly to his office to sort out the dispute; when the Committee examined Smt.Rena Chowdary R-5 and Anjaneyulu who was said to be in her company at the time of the purported incident on 10.11.2013 in S.R.Nagar PS limits, they strongly and firmly took the same stand that the incident of 10.11.2013 did take place; the matter is under investigation by the ACP, CCS; since the report of the Committee established the fault of the DCP, West Zone, the Home Department, while agreeing with the same, had forwarded the said report, vide proceedings dated 01.01.2014, to the General Administration (SC.D) Department which deals with the subject matter of initiating suitable disciplinary action against IPS officers; and no overt act or negligence has been established by the committee in its findings against Respondent No.4, the CI.

9. In his counter-affidavit the 2nd respondent has stated that, in compliance with the order of this Court dated 29.11.2013, he had instructed the Joint Commissioner to conduct a detailed enquiry into the matter and submit a report; the case in Cr. No.936 of 2013, on the file of the SR Nagar Police Station, was transferred on the evening of 05.12.2013 to the Central Crime Station, Hyderabad for investigation; CCS, Hyderabad is a separate unit, and is not subordinate to the 3rd respondent; on its transfer, the case has been re-registered as Cr. No.182 of 2013, and investigation has been taken up; the Joint Commissioner of Police, Hyderabad is an officer in the cadre of a Deputy Inspector General of Police, higher in rank than the Deputy Commissioner; he had conducted a detailed enquiry and submitted a report on 05.12.2013; as per the instructions issued by the Government, vide memo No.37993/PSC/A3 dated 23.12.2013, a committee was constituted to enquire whether police officials had interfered in civil disputes; the said committee consisted of the Commissioner of Police, the Additional Commissioner of Police (Law & order) and the Additional Commissioner of Police (Crimes and SIT). Daily situation reports (DSR) are prepared by police stations in all five zones of Hyderabad; the DSR contains crime reports, law and order issues, FIRs, VIP movements etc; the concerned DCPs have to consolidate the DSR every day with the information received from the police stations and submit the same, (both the soft and the hard copy), to the Commissioner of Police and other officials by 6.00 AM; the DSR, prepared in the office of the DCP West Zone dated 27.11.2013, was received by the 2nd respondent on 28.11.2013 in the morning itself; this procedure of DSR facilitated him and other higher officials to monitor the day to day affairs in all police stations in the twin cities; the DSR of West Zone for 27.11.2013, which was received before 6.00 A.M. on 28.11.2013, records Cr. No.936 of 2013; and this establishes that Cr. No.936 of 2013 was registered on 27.11.2013 itself. The 2nd respondent faults not only the endorsement of the 3rd respondent dated 13.11.2013, as CI, SR Nagar call to both parties and do justice to the deserved, but also his failure to register the case immediately in response to the petition of the 5th respondent and in calling the petitioner to his office to sort out the dispute. He submits that there was no evidence to show that the 3rd respondent had pressurised the petitioner to come forward to sign on prepared documents; no overt act or negligence was established by the committee in its findings against the fourth respondent; and many a time, he had issued oral and general instructions to all Station House Officers/Assistant Commissioners of Police in Hyderabad City not to interfere in civil disputes and, if any deviation was noticed, disciplinary action would be taken against the concerned individuals.

10. Elaborate submissions were made by Sri Mohd. Shafiuddin, Learned Counsel for the petitioner; the Learned Government Pleader for Home appearing on behalf of respondents 1 and 2, Sri R. Raghunandan, Learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the 3rd respondent, Sri Damalapati Srinivas, Learned Counsel for the 4th respondent and Sri M. Karunasagar, Learned Counsel for the 5th respondent. It is convenient to examine the contentions, put forth by Counsel on either side, under different heads. I. ROLE OF RESPONDENTS 3 AND 4 IN CALLING THE PETITIONER TO THE S.R. NAGAR POLICE STATION, AND THE OFFICE OF THE DCP, WEST ZONE, WITHOUT EVEN REGISTERING THE COMPLAINT, OF THE FIFTH RESPONDENT, UNDER SECTION 154 CRPC:

11. Sri R. Raghunandan, Learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of respondent No.3, would fairly state that respondent No.5 had met the 3rd respondent at his office on 13th November, 2013; the endorsement made on her complaint, to the Circle Inspector of Police S.R. Nagar police station on 13.11.2013, was by the 3rd respondent; the Sub-Inspector of Police, S.R. Nagar police station was instructed by the 3rd respondent to bring the petitioner to his office on 14th November; and the petitioner was asked to be present in the office of the 3rd respondent both on 14th and 19th November, 2013. Learned Senior Counsel would, however, contend that the 3rd respondent did not force the petitioner to settle the matter with the fifth respondent, or sign any papers; he had only sought to resolve family disputes, which is permissible in terms of para 120.6 of the judgment of the Supreme Court in Lalita Kumari v. Govt. of U.P. ; the memo issued by the Director General of Police on 25.11.2013 shows that the 3rd respondent was required to undertake family counselling; and the petitioner has filed the present Writ Petition only to stall further proceedings against him.

12. Sri M. Karunasagar, Learned Counsel for the fifth respondent, would paint the petitioner in poor light. He submits that the petitioner was exploiting his widowed sister and had tried every trick in the book to deprive her of her rightful share of her property; not only did he threaten to kill her if she did not yield to his illegal demands, but he had also assaulted her physically on 10th November, 2013; despite the shabby treatment meted out to her by her brother (the petitioner), the fifth respondent wanted an amicable solution to their inter-se property disputes; and she did not initially wish to lodge a criminal complaint against him as that would tarnish their family reputation.

13. In his counter-affidavit the 3rd respondent submits that the 5th respondent met him at his office on 13.11.2013, and complained that her brother (the writ petitioner) along with his brother-in-law had assaulted her on 10.11.2013 in S.R. Nagar area, when she was coming back from the house of her relatives in the company of her cousin; she had also stated that this assault was a part of the ongoing fight over her fathers property in which she had a rightful share; she was highly agitated and feared for her physical safety; despite the petitioners behaviour towards her, she was not interested in lodging a formal criminal complaint, as the accused was her brother; he had informed her that the proper course would be to approach the concerned SHO i.e., SHO, Sanjeevaeddynagar police station, and had endorsed the same on the written representation given by her to him; he had also informed the 4th respondent, and had asked him to look into the matter; the 5th respondent again came to his office on 14.11.2013 and complained that the 4th respondent was not taking any interest in her case, and had insisted that he should look into the matter, failing which she apprehended further physical assault; as the 5th respondent feared for her safety on the one hand, and was not willing to move forward and invoke the criminal law process on the other, he had directed the 4th respondent to locate the petitioner and inform him that he would like to meet him to verify facts before any further process was initiated; thereafter at his office on the same day, when the 5th respondent was also present, he had enquired about the matter with the petitioner who requested for time to set out his side of the case; the petitioner had insisted that he had not assaulted his sister, and had not deprived her of any part of the property; he stated that he would come back on 19.11.2013 with his relatives who would be able to attest to these facts; the 5th respondent informed that she would also be present on 19.11.2013; the petitioner and the 5th respondent came to his office on 19.11.2013; their maternal uncle also accompanied the 5th respondent; the petitioner also brought one of his friends; in the meeting, the petitioners uncle tried to counsel the petitioner and had asked him to amicably resolve issues; as these issues were getting more complicated, he had requested all the parties to leave his room as other visitors were waiting to meet him; the petitioner left his office premises thereafter, and the matter ended there; the 5th respondent continued to meet him, and had asked him to intervene in the matter, as she apprehended further trouble and physical danger both to her and her minor daughter; when the 5th respondent met him at his office on 27.11.2013, he instructed the 4th respondent to register a formal complaint, and investigate further into the matter; the 5th respondent had, thereafter, approached the 4th respondent on 27.11.2013 at 8.00 PM; he had not instructed any subordinate officer, including the 4th respondent, to take forcible action or to forcibly bring the petitioner to his office; he had sought to verify facts before commencing the procedure prescribed under the Cr.P.C; he neither directed the petitioner to settle his property disputes nor did he pressurize him to sign documents or transfer his rights in his fathers property in favour of the 5th respondent; his only concern was the physical safety of the 5th respondent; he never called the petitioner to his office after 19.11.2013; the 5th respondent kept coming to his office seeking protection as she felt that she was still under physical threat; he had again instructed the 4th respondent to formally register the complaint, and take up investigation; and the petitioner had filed the Writ Petition only to ensure that his earlier actions, including the assault on his sister, does not result in criminal investigation.

14. In his additional counter-affidavit filed before this Court the 3rd respondent submits that he had interacted with the petitioner and the 5th respondent only to ascertain facts, and give a quietus to the issue arising out of the conduct of the petitioner with the 5th respondent; he had neither pressurized the petitioner to sign on any prepared documents nor had he threatened to involve him in criminal cases, if he failed to do so; he did not instruct the SR Nagar Police Station, or the Sub-Inspector of Police, to bring the petitioner and his sister in a police jeep by force; what he had instructed was to send them to his office; even as per the statement of the petitioner, before the Joint Commissioner on 01.12.2013, the Inspector had asked him to accompany SI Ajay Kumar in the police jeep to his office; he had called the petitioner and the 5th respondent in good faith, and with the bonafide intention of preventing any untoward incident; and he had treated it as a family dispute, and not a civil dispute.

15. In his counter-affidavit the fourth respondent states that the 3rd respondent had called him over phone and had informed him that he was sending the 5th respondent along with an endorsed complaint against her brother; the 3rd respondent, while directing him not to register the complaint since it related to a dispute between a brother and sister, had instructed him to produce both parties before him at his office; the 5th respondent was sent to SR Nagar police station, by the 3rd respondent on 13.11.2013, with his endorsement on her telugu complaint as CI SR Nagar please call both parties and do the justice deserved; the complaint showed that there was a property dispute between the 5th respondent and the petitioner; the complainant alleged that she had been threatened by her brother, and his brother-in-law; she had requested him to take action against them; after going through the contents of the complaint, he had advised the 5th respondent to approach the competent Civil Court as the allegations in the complaint were civil in nature; in the morning hours of 14.11.2013, he received a phone call from the 3rd respondent instructing him to call and produce the petitioner before him, as he wanted to counsel both of them in his office; he informed the 3rd respondent that there was no such locality called Jayanagar in the limits of S.R. Nagar police station, at which the alleged incident is said to have taken place; even then the 3rd respondent had asked him to summon and produce the petitioner before him for counselling; in obedience to the directions of the 3rd respondent he had entrusted the task of contacting the petitioner to Sri D. Ajay Kumar, S.I. of police, and had asked him to produce both the parties before the 3rd respondent; he had simply obeyed the instructions of his superior officer in the fear of facing his wrath; the S.I. of Police had contacted the petitioner over his mobile on 14.11.2013 at 1.00 p.m; he had asked the petitioner to come to the police station as he was summoned by the 3rd respondent to be present before him, as his sister had given a complaint making allegations against him; at 5.00 p.m. the petitioner and his brother-in-law came to the police station; in accordance with the instructions of the 3rd respondent, the petitioner was taken to the office of the DCP, West Zone by the Sub-Inspector of Police Sri D. Ajaykumar; he has no knowledge of what transpired thereafter in the office of the 3rd respondent; again on 27.11.2013 the 3rd respondent instructed him over phone to register a case on the complaint of the 5th respondent; he was not present in the police station when the 5th respondent approached at 8.00 p.m; and Sri M. Seetaramulu, S.I. of Police, had registered Crime No.936 of 2013 under Sections 323, 506 and 509 IPC.

16. In her counter-affidavit the fifth respondent submits that on 10.11.2013 at about 10.00 PM, when she was returning from Kukatpally after crossing SR Nagar traffic signals, the petitioner and his brother-in-law had stopped their vehicle; the petitioners brother-in-law slapped her, and her brother beat her black and blue; when she cried, they left the scene of the offence quickly; they also demanded that she sign on documents relinquishing her share of the property; on 13.11.2013 morning, she and Sri Ramanjaneyulu went to the 3rd respondent; she submitted a petition regarding the attack on her and the threat to her life from the petitioner and his brother-in-law over property disputes; she had requested the 3rd respondent to elicit the nature of the offence, instead of registering the complaint against his brother; as the disputes related to properties, and to ensure that the police did not interfere in civil disputes, she had requested that the petitioner be called, counselled and restrained from threatening her regarding the property; the 3rd respondent had endorsed the complaint to the 4th respondent; on 14.11.2013, the 4th respondent had sent both of them to the 3rd respondent where they were counselled by the 3rd respondent; the 3rd respondent had only advised both of them to settle their family disputes; there was no threat or coercion by the 3rd respondent; though he was busy in attending to people visiting his office, the meeting was held in his office room; since the dispute was not resolved, they had both requested the 3rd respondent to give them time upto 19.11.2013, and had promised to visit his office again; her maternal uncle had come to Hyderabad at her request, and had visited the office of the 3rd respondent along with her and Sri Ramanjaneyulu on 19.11.2013; the petitioner was also present in the office of the 3rd respondent along with Sri Venkat Reddy; as the 3rd respondent was busy with official work, he did not devote much time; he only asked the petitioner not to threaten her; the 3rd respondent had asked all of them to leave his chambers as he had to attend to some more complainants waiting outside; after coming out of the chambers of the 3rd respondent, the petitioner had again threatened her with direconsequences, and had stated that he would file cases against the police officers who were supporting her; the petitioners intention in filing the Writ Petition is only to ensure that no police officer helped her against his criminal acts; she and her minor daughter have a threat to their lives at the hands of the petitioner; the petitioner has the active support of a sitting MLA; though she had approached the MLA, and had narrated the injustice done to her, nothing had happened; and this itself showed that the petitioner, by hook or crook, was seeking to deprive her of her valuable and legal property rights.

17. From the counter-affidavit of the 4th respondent it is evident that the 3rd respondent had asked him not to register the complaint of the 5th respondent which he had endorsed on 13.11.2013, and to produce both the petitioner and the 5th respondent before him; in the morning of 14th November, 2013 he received a phone call from the 3rd respondent instructing him to produce the petitioner before him for counselling; he had asked the Sub-Inspector Sri D. Ajay Kumar to produce both parties before the 3rd respondent; the Sub-Inspector had called the petitioner over mobile and asked him to come to the police station; when the petitioner and his brother-in-law came to the police station at 5.00 P.M. on 14.11.2013 in his car, he was taken by the Sub-Inspector, to the office of the 3rd respondent, in a police jeep. In his statement, before the Joint Commissioner of Police on 01.12.2013 at 03.30 P.M, the petitioner stated that on 19.11.2013 he received a call on his phone number 8096102190 from the office of the D.C.P., West Zone and, in response thereto, he had gone over to the office of the 3rd respondent at 2.45 P.M where he was detained till 9.30 P.M. The counter-affidavit of the 2nd respondent, and the enquiry report of the Joint Commissioner, show that the petitioner was counselled, in the office of the D.C.P., West Zone, by the 3rd respondent both on 14th and 19th November, 2013 without even registering the complaint of the 5th respondent containing the endorsement of the 3rd respondent dated 13.11.2013.

18. The question which necessitates examination is whether the petitioner could have been, orally and forcibly, summoned to his office by the 3rd respondent even before registration of the complaint under Section 154 CrPC. The first information report is either given in writing or is reduced to writing. The Code contemplates two kinds of FIRs: the duly signed FIR under Section 154(1) is by the informant to the officer concerned at the police station. The second kind of FIR is one which is registered by the police officer himself on the basis of information received, or other than by way of an informant [Section 157(1)]. This information must also be duly recorded, and a copy should be sent to the Magistrate forthwith. (Lalita Kumari1). The sine qua non for recording an FIR is that there must be an information, and that information must disclose a cognizable offence. If information disclosing a cognizable offence, satisfying the requirements of Section 154(1) Cr.P.C, is laid before him, the police officer has no option but to enter the substance thereof in the prescribed form i.e., to register a case on the basis of such information. (State of Haryana v. Bhajan Lal ). In registering an FIR the consent, or otherwise, of the complainant is irrelevant. For cognizable offences a duty is cast upon the police to register an FIR, and conduct investigation. The legislative intent of Section 154(1) CrPC is to ensure that the information, relating to the commission of a cognizable offence, is promptly registered and investigated in accordance with law. (Lalita Kumari1). The context in which the word shall appears in Section 154(1) CrPC, the object for which it has been used and the consequences that will follow from the infringement of the direction to register FIRs, show that the word shall, used in Section 154(1), is mandatory in character. Section 154(1) of the Code places an unequivocal duty upon the police officer, in charge of a police station, to register an FIR on receipt of information that a cognizable offence has been committed, and does not confer any discretion on him to embark upon a preliminary inquiry prior to the registration of the FIR. (Lalita Kumari1; Anju Chaudhary v. State of Uttar Pradesh ; State of Uttar Pradesh v. Bhagwant Kishore Joshi ).

19. The requirement of Section 154 Cr.P.C is only that the report must disclose the commission of a cognizable offence, and that is sufficient to set the investigating machinery in motion. The intention of the legislature, by the insertion of sub-section (3) of Section 154, is to ensure that no information of the commission of a cognizable offence is ignored or is not acted upon. The obligation to register an FIR has inherent advantages. (a) It is the first step to access to justice for a victim; (b) It upholds the rule of law in as much as the ordinary person brings forth the commission of a cognizable crime to the knowledge of the State; (c) It also facilitates swift investigation and sometimes even prevention of the crime. In both cases, it only effectuates the regime of law; and (d) It leads to less manipulation in criminal cases and lessens incidents of antedated FIR or deliberately delayed FIR. The object sought to be achieved by registering the earliest information as an FIR is, inter alia, two fold: one, that the criminal process is set into motion and is well documented from the very start; and second, that the earliest information, received in relation to the commission of a cognizable offence, is recorded so that there cannot be any embellishment, etc. later. The FIR is registered in a book called the FIR book or the FIR register. A copy of each FIR is sent to the superior officers and to the concerned Judicial Magistrate. The signature of the complainant is obtained in the FIR book as and when a complaint is given at the police station. As each FIR has a unique annual number, it is possible for supervisory police officers and the courts, wherever necessary, to exercise strict control and keep track of registration of FIRs. The underpinnings of compulsory registration of the FIR is not only to ensure transparency in the criminal justice-delivery system but also to ensure judicial oversight. Section 157(1) deploys the word forthwith. Any information received under Section 154(1), or otherwise, has to be promptly informed, in the form of a report, to the Magistrate. The commission of a cognizable offence is not only brought to the knowledge of the investigating agency but also to the subordinate judiciary. (Lalita Kumari1).

20. The 3rd respondent has acted amiss in directing the 4th respondent not to register an FIR, on the information furnished in the representation submitted by the 5th respondent on 13.11.2013, on the specious plea that she had requested that the complaint not be registered but the petitioner be counselled, instead, at the S.R. Nagar police station or the office of the 3rd respondent. Registration of an FIR under Section 154(1) Cr.P.C. is not at the choice of the complainant. Once information, either oral or written, regarding commission of a cognizable offence is brought to the notice of the police officer, he has no option but to register the FIR forthwith. The police officer cannot avoid his duty of registering the offence if a cognizable offence is disclosed. Action must be taken against the erring officer who does not register the FIR if information received by him discloses the commission of a cognizable offence. (Lalita Kumari1).

II. INVESTIGATION OF A COGNIZABLE OFFENCE CAN BE UNDERTAKEN ONLY AFTER THE COMPLAINT IS REGISTERED UNDER SECTION 154(1) CRPC:

21. Is the exercise of power by the 3rd respondent, in forcing the petitioner to appear before him at his office on 14th and 19th November, 2013, referable to his powers of investigation under Sections 156 and 157 Cr.P.C? Commencement of investigation by a police officer is subject to two conditions, firstly the police officer should have reason to suspect the commission of a cognizable offence as required by Section 157(1), and secondly the police officer should subjectively satisfy himself that there is sufficient ground for entering on an investigation even before he starts the investigation. Clause (b) of the proviso to Section 157(1) Cr.P.C. postulates that the police officer shall draw his satisfaction only on the material placed before him at that stage, namely, the FIR together with the documents, if any, enclosed therewith, before he enters on an investigation. (Bhajan Lal2). Under Chapter XII of the CrPC, investigation consists generally of the following steps: (1) proceeding to the spot, (2) ascertainment of the facts and circumstances of the case, (3) discovery and arrest of the suspected offender, (4) collection of evidence relating to the commission of the offence which may consist of (a) the examination of various persons (including the accused) and the reduction of their statements into writing, if the officer thinks fit, (b) the search of places or seizure of things considered necessary for the investigation and to be produced at the trial, and (5) formation of the opinion as to whether, on the material collected, there is a case to place the accused before a Magistrate for trial. (H. N. Rishbud and Inder Singh v. The State of Delhi ; State of M.P. v. Mubarak Ali ; Bhagwant Kishore Joshi4; Augustine v. State ; Krishna Lal Gulati v. The State ).

22. As the main object of investigation is to bring home the offence to the offender, the essential duties of an Investigating Officer, apart from arresting the offender, is to collect all material necessary for establishing the accusation against the offender. (Bhagwant Kishore Joshi4). Conducting an investigation into an offence, after registration of the FIR under Section 154 CrPC, is the procedure established by law. The right of the accused, under Article 21 of the Constitution, is protected if the FIR is registered first, and the investigation is then conducted in accordance with law. (Lalita Kumari1).

23. A police station is defined, under Section 2(s) CrPC, to mean any post or place declared, generally or specially by the State Government, to be a police station, and includes any local area specified by the State Government in this behalf. Section 36 Cr.P.C. enables Police officers, superior in rank to an officer in charge of a police station, to exercise the same powers, throughout the local area to which they are appointed, as may be exercised by such officer within the limits of his Station. Section 154(3) enables a person aggrieved, by a refusal on the part of an officer in-charge of the police station to record the information under Section 154(1), to send the substance of such information to the Superintendent of Police who is empowered either to investigate himself, or direct an investigation to be made by any police officer subordinate to him, if the complaint discloses the commission of a cognizable offence. Even in cases where a cognizable offence has been committed, an investigation can be caused only after the complaint is registered under Section 154(1) Cr.P.C. After registration of the complaint under Section 154(1) CrPC, and during the course of investigation under Section 156 CrPC, a police officer is empowered under Section 41-A CrPC to ask the accused to appear before him by way of a notice/order in writing. In the case on hand the complaint of the 5th respondent dated 13.11.2014 was not even registered despite which the 3rd respondent directed the 4th respondent over telephone on 14.11.2013 to send the petitioner to his office, which directions the 4th respondent promptly complied by sending the petitioner, along with the Sub-Inspector of Police Sri Ajay Kumar, in a police jeep to the office of the 3rd respondent.

24. Without the complaint, given by the 5th respondent on 13.11.2014, being registered under Section 154(1) Cr.P.C the 3rd respondent could not have investigated, or to have caused an investigation, regarding the commission of cognizable offences. Even if he was satisfied that the complaint given by the 5th respondent on 13.11.2013 disclosed the commission of a cognizable offence, the 3rd respondent was statutorily obligated to have first directed that the complaint be registered under Section 154(1) Cr.P.C and only then to have caused investigation during the course of which, if need be, he could have issue a written notice to the petitioner, under Section 41-A Cr.P.C, to appear before him. An oral direction by a police officer, to the accused or a witness, to appear before him does not have statutory sanction either under Section 41-A or Section 160 CrPC. As registration of an FIR under Section 154(1) Cr.P.C. precedes investigation under Sections 156 and 157 Cr.P.C, the 3rd respondent cannot fall back on the powers of investigation, conferred on a police officer under the Code, to justify his illegal act of calling the petitioner to his office on 14th and 19th November, 2013 as the FIR was registered more than a week thereafter on 27.11.2013.

III. PRELIMINARY ENQUIRY BEFORE REGISTRATION OF THE FIR:

25. Sri R. Raghunandan, Learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the 3rd respondent, would submit that it is only after the judgment of the Supreme Court, in Lalita Kumari1, has the law, regarding registration of complaints for cognizable offences, become clear; prior thereto, it was in doubt whether or not such a complaint could be registered without a preliminary enquiry; and even in the judgment of the Supreme Court, in Lalita Kumari1, a preliminary enquiry is permissible in family disputes.
26. It is necessary, therefore, to examine whether a preliminary enquiry can be conducted before registration of the FIR, and whether the Counselling exercise undertaken by the 3rd respondent on 14th and 19th November, 2013 partakes the character of a preliminary enquiry. In Lalita Kumari1, the learned Additional Solicitor General Mr. Sidharth Luthra pointed out to the Supreme Court that throughout the country, in matrimonial, commercial, medical negligence and corruption related offences, there exist provisions for conducting an inquiry or a preliminary inquiry by the police, without/before registering an FIR under Section 154 CrPC. He relied on various police rules, prevailing in the States of Punjab, Rajasthan, U.P., Madhya Pradesh, Kolkata, Bombay, etc., for conducting an inquiry before registering an FIR, to contend that a preliminary inquiry, before registration of an FIR, should be held permissible; the power to carry out an inquiry or a preliminary inquiry by the police, which precedes registration of an FIR, will eliminate misuse of the process, as registration of FIR serves as an impediment against a person for various important activities like applying for a job or a passport, etc. (para 20 of SCC).
27. It is in this context that the Supreme Court, in Lalitha Kumari1, observed that there were instances where the power of the police to register an FIR, and initiate an investigation thereinto, were misused where a cognizable offence was not made out from the contents of the complaint; Section 498-A of the Penal Code, 1860 (in short IPC) was being misused, and a large number of frivolous reports were being lodged; the anguish expressed by the Supreme Court, in Preeti Gupta v. State of Jharkhand , had resulted in the 243rd Report of the Law Commission of India which was submitted on 30.08.2012; the Law Commission, in its report, concluded that, though the offence under Section 498-A could be made compoundable, the extent of misuse was not established by empirical data and, thus, could not be a ground to denude the provision of its efficacy (para 35 and 36 of SCC); although Section 154 CrPC postulated mandatory registration of FIRs on receipt of all cognizable offences, yet, there may be instances where a preliminary inquiry may be required owing to a change in the genesis and novelty of crimes with the passage of time, one such instance was of allegations regarding medical negligence of doctors;
it would be unfair and inequitable to prosecute a medical professional only on the basis of the allegations in the complaint (para 115 of SCC); while ensuring and protecting the rights of the accused and the complainant, the preliminary inquiry should be time-bound and, in any case, should not exceed 7 days; and the fact of such delay, and the causes of it, must be reflected in the General Diary entry (para 120.7 of SCC). (Lalita Kumari1).

28. Reference to the terms preliminary inquiry and inquiry under Sections 159, 202 and 340 of the Code, is to a judicial exercise by the Court, and not by the police. The term inquiry, under Section 2(g) of the Code, is relatable to a judicial act and not to the steps taken by the police which are either investigation after the stage of Section 154 CrPC or a preliminary inquiry prior to the registration of an FIR. Other considerations are not relevant at the stage of registration of the FIR such as, whether the information is falsely given, whether the information is genuine, whether the information is credible, etc. These are issues that have to be verified during investigation of the FIR. At the stage of registration of the FIR, all that is required to be considered is whether the information given, ex facie, discloses the commission of a cognizable offence. If, after investigation, the information given is found to be false, there is always an option to prosecute the complainant for filing a false FIR. (Lalita Kumari1).

29. Reliance placed by Sri R. Raghunandan, Learned Senior Counsel on Para 120.6 of the judgment of the Supreme Court, in Lalita Kumari1, to contend that the 3rd respondent had the power to cause a preliminary enquiry regarding the family disputes between the petitioner and his sister-the fifth respondent, and call the petitioner to the police station in the course of such preliminary enquiry, is misplaced. In Para 120.6 of the judgment, in Lalita Kumari1, the Supreme Court observed:

120.6. As to what type and in which cases preliminary inquiry is to be conducted will depend on the facts and circumstances of each case. The category of cases in which preliminary inquiry may be made are as under:
(a) Matrimonial disputes/family disputes
(b) Commercial offences
(c) Medical negligence cases
(d) Corruption cases
(e) Cases where there is abnormal delay/laches in initiating criminal prosecution, for example, over 3 months delay in reporting the matter without satisfactorily explaining the reasons for delay.
The aforesaid are only illustrations and not exhaustive of all conditions which may warrant preliminary inquiry.

30. Reference to matrimonial disputes/family disputes, in Para 120.6 of the judgment of the Supreme Court in Lalita Kumari1, is only that a preliminary enquiry may be made thereinto, and not that a police officer can resort to counselling and settlement of civil or property disputes, that too in a police station, forcing one or both the parties to appear before him thereat. The observations of the Supreme Court, in Lalitha Kumari1, that a preliminary enquiry could be conducted in matrimonial disputes/family disputes, were in the context of false and frivolous complaints being made under Sections 498 and 498-A IPC, the Dowry Prohibition Act and in the light of the judgment of the Supreme Court in Preeti Gupta9. Even in such cases a preliminary enquiry can be caused only to ascertain whether or not the complaint discloses the commission of a cognizable offence; and not to verify the veracity or otherwise of the information received. (Lalita Kumari1). In any event the premises/precincts of a police station cannot be converted into a counselling centre for resolution of such disputes.

31. The preliminary enquiry which can be made, in relation to matrimonial disputes/family disputes, is not to verify the veracity or otherwise of the information received, but only to ascertain whether the information reveals any cognizable offence (Para 120.5 of SCC). While information, which discloses the commission of a cognizable offence, is required to be mandatorily registered as an FIR under Section 154 CrPC, and no preliminary enquiry is permissible in such a situation (Para 120.1 of SCC), if the information received does not disclose a cognizable offence but indicates the necessity for an enquiry, a preliminary enquiry may be conducted only to ascertain whether a cognizable offence is disclosed or not. If the inquiry discloses the commission of a cognizable offence, the FIR must be registered. (120.2 of SCC).

32. Unlike an investigation, into the commission of a cognizable offence, which can only be initiated after the complaint is registered under Section 154(1) CrPC, a preliminary enquiry is to be caused prior to the registration of the FIR. If the accused, in the complaint registered as an FIR, can be summoned by the investigating officer, during the course of investigation, only by way of a written notice under Section 41-A Cr.P.C, it does not stand to reason that a person, against whom an FIR has not even been registered, can be orally and forcibly summoned to the Police Station or to the office of a Senior police officer. Under the guise of a preliminary enquiry, no person can be deprived of his liberty, and compelled to appear at a police station on the oral directions of a police officer without even the complaint being registered, and an investigation commenced, in accordance with the provisions of the CrPC.

IV. DO THE A.P. POLICE MANUAL AND THE CIRCULAR MEMOS ISSUED BY HIS SUPERIORS EMPOWER THE THIRD RESPONDENT TO CONDUCT COUNSELLING SESSIONS IN HIS OFFICE?

33. In his counter-affidavit, the 3rd respondent submits that the role of police officers in civil disputes, involving some amount of criminality, has been considered by the office of the Director General of Police; circulars and memorandums have been issued, in relation to these issues, from time to time; the A.P. Police Manual also prescribes guidelines relating to the exercise of power vested in police officials in the discharge of their duties; Sections 36 and 149 Cr.P.C. prescribe certain duties, and functional roles on police officers; in all the stated circulars and memos, as well as the police manual, instructions have been given to police officials not to shy away from acting on these issues when criminality is also involved; Order 322-1 specifically instructs police officials not to shirk their responsibility of protecting persons against injury or trespass, particularly when people complain of threats to their physical safety; the Circular issued by the Director General of Police dated 04.08.2012 also instructs police officials to take preventive action as stipulated under Order 322-1 of the A.P. Police Manual; his endeavour was only to ascertain the true and correct facts, in what appeared to be a family dispute, before any criminal investigation was initiated; and he had only conducted himself in accordance with the A.P. Police Manual, and the instructions issued by the higher authorities from time to time. Reliance is placed by the 3rd respondent on Standing Order No.322-I of Vol.I of the A.P. Police Manual; the circular memos of the Director General of Police dated 04.08.2012, 17.08.2012, 19.09.2012, 28.12.2012 and 31.12.2012; the memo issued to his office by the Director General of Police dated 25.11.2013 informing him of the poor performance in family counselling centres in June, 2013; the memo of the Additional Director General of Police dated 02.02.2013; the minutes of the review meeting held by the Additional Director General of Police (Co-ordination) on 23.05.2013; the memo dated 06.04.2002 issued by the Commissioner of Police regarding registration of cases under Sections 498, 498-A and the Dowry Prohibition Act; and the other memos of the Commissioner of Police dated 28.11.2011, 05.02.2013 and 09.01.2014.

34. It is necessary, therefore, to refer to the aforesaid memos and Police Standing Orders, albeit in brief. By the circular memo dated 04.08.2012, the Director General of Police informed the Superintendents of Police that police officers had abdicated their responsibility in all civil disputes, even with ingredients of criminality, on the pretext of instructions from the Chief Office, Hyderabad, and the directions of the High Court of A.P restricting police from interference with civil disputes; police officers had wrongly interpreted the directions of the High Court, and the instructions of the Chief Office; they had left such issues to be dealt with by musclemen and anti-social elements; Section 149 Cr.P.C. enjoined upon the Police to intervene in all matters where there was apprehension of the commission of a cognisable offence; Standing Order 322(1) made it abundantly clear that Police Officers could not shirk their responsibility of protecting persons against injury or trespass; Standing Order 322(1) sub-clauses A, B, C and D laid down modalities for police action in all civil disputes; the Chief Office had merely directed unscrupulous police officers to refrain from adjudicating upon the determination of property rights for pecuniary gains; and this was also true of criminal offences, besides civil disputes. All the Superintendents and Commissioners of Police were directed to instruct all police officers, subordinate to them, to take legal action by registering cases; and take preventive action etc., as stipulated under Standing Order No.322(1) of Vol.1 of the A.P. Police Manual, in all civil disputes with an element of criminality, warranting police intervention. The Regional Inspector Generals of Police and the Range DIGs were directed to ensure compliance of these instructions to prevent inaction, on the part of the police, being taken undue advantage of by the land mafia, goondas and hired criminals; ensure that no complaints, of police omission and inaction, are reported where action as per law is required; and all police officers should be disabused of the notion that civil disputes were outside their purview, and they were not entitled to take action.

35. In his circular memo dated 17.08.2012, the Director General of Police called upon the Superintendents of Police/Commissioners of Police to focus on certain issues for better delivery of services to the people, and to further improve their image. Among the issues, on which focus was required to be placed, included all civil disputes having an element of criminality which were required to be dealt with as per Standing Order No.322(1) of Volume I - Part I of the A.P. Police Manual. In his circular memo dated 19.12.2012, the Director General of Police referred to the problems, regarding access to police, being a recurring complaint. The Superintendents/Commissioners of Police were informed that a common grievances day should be observed on Monday in all districts; they must stay at headquarters/police stations on Monday, except in an emergency that too with the permission of the immediate senior officers; they should make entries of all such complaints in the complaint register, and take necessary action; and send a consolidated report, every month, in the proforma enclosed. By his memo dated 28.12.2012, the Director General of Police directed the Commissioners/Superintendents of Police to implement certain people friendly measures such as free registration of cases, holding a common grievances day each Monday, action in civil disputes etc. By his circular memo dated 31.12.2012, the Director General of Police issued instructions regarding the people friendly measures taken by police headquarters. All Superintendents of Police/Commissioners of Police were required to conduct a review and, among the measures they were directed to take, included grievance redressal within a specified time frame. All Senior Superintendents and Commissioners of Police were requested to effectively implement these measures to make the police a people friendly organisation.

36. By his Memo dated 02.02.2013, the Additional Director General of Police (Co-ordination) requested all Commissioners of Police to nominate their representatives for the meeting to be held on 12.02.2013 in his chambers to review the status of implementation of the instructions issued, through various circulars, by the DGP. All officers were directed to come prepared on several issues including the functioning of family counselling centres. On the issue of grievance redressal, the Additional Director General of Police (Co-ordination), in the review meeting held on 23.05.2013, observed that receipt of grievance petitions in Hyderabad City was poor; pendency of petitions in South Zone of Hyderabad City was high, and the Central Zone was low; all officers should improve receipt of petitions from people, dispose them of within fifteen days and, in exceptional cases, within two months; Hyderabad city had done badly in this item of work (ie., grievance redressal) as compared to other Commissionerates in the State; the Commissioners of Police at Vijayawada and Visakhapatnam should establish family counselling centres immediately; and these Centres should be run with eight highly qualified persons such as doctors, psychologists, retired Judges, retired Police Officers, academicians, NGOs etc., including Women Social Workers; functioning of family counselling centres should be regularly monitored by the Deputy Commissioners of Police; they should maintain a register with particulars of how many cases were received, how many were disposed of, and how many are pending, with reasons; if need be legal action should be initiated; issues, which were not sorted out, must be sent back to the Police Stations for registration of cases; and there was no need for serving Police Officers/men to involve themselves in the counselling session. All Commissioners of Police were advised to submit a list of members, in the Centres, in the next review meeting; maintain records of family counselling centres properly; and to contact the district authorities, dealing with the mission for elimination of urban poverty, for funds to run these family counselling centres.

37. In his memo dated 06.04.2002 the Commissioner of Police, after referring to the judgment of the Supreme Court of India in Joginder Kumar v. The State of UP , informed all SHOs, Divisional ACPs, Additional, Joint and Deputy Commissioners of Police that, with a view to avoid adverse criticism, miscarriage of justice and arbitrary deprivation of liberty of an individual, no person (either woman, man or child), should henceforth be arrested in any case registered under Sections 498 or 498-A IPC or the Dowry Prohibition Act without obtaining prior written permission from the concerned Deputy Commissioners of Police supervising investigation of the case; the concerned Inspector of Police should send a detailed report for this purpose, duly enclosing the CD file and all relevant documents, clearly placing on record the evidence available against each accused, to the concerned Deputy Commissioners of Police who should properly examine the complicity of each accused, and accord written permission to effect his/her arrest; and these instructions should be scrupulously followed. By his memo dated 28.11.2011, the Commissioner of Police, Hyderabad instructed Station House Officers to take cognizance of each complaint; they could transfer cases, to the concerned police station, if it did not pertain to their jurisdiction; nobody could drive away a complainant on the point of jurisdiction; the petitioners should not be harassed under any circumstances; and, if any such incident came to their notice, disciplinary action should be initiated against the concerned Station House Officers. By his memo dated 05.02.2013, the Commissioner of Police informed all Deputy Commissioners, Joint Commissioners and Additional Commissioners of the need to go through circulars personally, and ensure strict implementation of all the guidelines by their subordinate officers. By his memo dated 09.01.2014, the Commissioner of Police clarified that when petitioners approach superior officers to explain their grievance, and the facts of the whole story of the petition are not known to the superior officers and endorsements are made for necessary action, the entire facts and circumstances of the case should be examined and action taken only as per the facts and law; if required a report should be sent, regarding the facts, to the superior officer concerned who made the endorsement; action should not be taken which is arbitrary, one sided, or not as per law; any contravention of these instructions would be viewed seriously; and disciplinary action would be taken against the concerned.

38. The circular memos of the Director General of Police dated 04.08.2012 and 17.08.2012, asking police officers not to shirk their responsibilities in civil disputes with an element of criminality, must be read in the light of Standing Order 322-1 of the A.P. Police Manual. Standing Order No.322-1, which deals with problems arising out of Civil Disputes Duties of Police, reads as under:

Many persons approach the police for protection on account of threats to their safety due to disputes relating to property. Several complaints are also presented in writing. A good number of complaints pertain to forcible dispossession or possession of properties by use of violence or by hired goondas, or relate to matters providing religious ramifications leading to communal disturbances or where habitual land grabbers or criminal syndicates are involved etc. There are also cases wherein a group of people, when they face an immediate threat, approach the police for relief. While the police should not interfere into the disputes, which are purely of civil nature, they cannot shirk their responsibility of protecting persons against injury or trespass particularly when the people complained against are powerful or hired goondas. The following instructions are, therefore, issued for the guidance of the police officers.
A. Orders of the civil court should be implemented and all assistance should be provided to the Civil Court officials as mentioned in order
321.
B. If any civil dispute is likely to give rise to an imminent breach of peace or disturbance of public order, the police officer shall take recourse to Sections 144 to 148 Cr.P.C. as the case may be (Chapter 38, Volume II).

C. As per Section 149 CrPC every Police Officer may interpose for the purpose of preventing and shall, to the best of his ability, prevent the commission of any cognizable offence. In application of this provision, police officers shall be guided by instructions given by superior officer of the rank of SP/DCP/CP/DGP.

D. In dealing with these cases the SHO should make a contemporaneous record of every action that he takes in the general diary and in the connected file. (emphasis supplied)

39. Sections 144 to 148 CrPC, as referred to in Part B of Standing Order 322-I, relate to the powers of a Magistrate to issue orders in urgent cases of nuisance or apprehended danger (Section

144); powers of a District Magistrate to prohibit carrying arms in a procession or a mass drill or a mass training with arms (Section 144-A); powers of an Executive Magistrate where disputes concerning land or water is likely to cause breach of peace (Section

145); powers of a Magistrate to attach the subject of dispute and to appoint a receiver (Section 146); powers of an Executive Magistrate in a dispute concerning right of use of land or water (Section 147); and the powers of a District Magistrate to conduct a local enquiry (Section 148).

40. Chapter XI Cr.P.C contains provisions dealing with preventive action by the police. Section 149 enables every police officer to interpose for the purpose of preventing, and to prevent, the commission of any cognizable offence. Section 151 CrPC allows a police officer to arrest a person, even before the commission of a cognizable offence, in order to prevent the commission of that offence, if it cannot be prevented otherwise. Such preventive arrests are valid for 24 hours. (Lalita Kumari1; S. Masthan Saheb v. P.S.R. Anjaneyulu ). The conditions under which a police officer may arrest a person, without an order from a Magistrate and without a warrant, have been laid down in Section 151 CrPC. He can do so only if he has come to know of a design of the person concerned to commit any cognizable offence. A further condition for the exercise of such power, which must also be fulfilled, is that the arrest should be made only if it appears to the police officer concerned that the commission of the offence cannot be otherwise prevented. The section, therefore, expressly lays down the requirements for the exercise of the power to arrest without an order from a Magistrate and without a warrant. If these conditions are not fulfilled and a person is arrested under Section 151 CrPC, the arresting authority may be exposed to proceedings under the law. Sub-section (2) lays down the rule that normally a person so arrested shall be detained in custody not for a period exceeding 24 hours. It, therefore, follows that in the absence of anything else, on expiry of 24 hours, he must be released. Section 151 CrPC itself makes provision for the circumstances in which an arrest can be made under that Section and also places a limitation on the period for which a person so arrested may be detained. The guidelines are inbuilt in the provision itself. These statutory guidelines read with the requirements laid down by this Court in Joginder Kumar10 and D.K. Basu v. State of W.B. provide an assurance that the power shall not be abused and, in case of abuse, the authority concerned shall be adequately punished. (Ahmed Noormohmed Bhatti v. State of Gujarat ). It would be prudent for a police officer in the interest of protection of the constitutional rights of a citizen and, perhaps in his own interest, that no arrest is made without arriving at a reasonable satisfaction, after some investigation, regarding the genuineness and the bonafides of a complaint, a reasonable belief both as to the person's complicity and of the need to effect arrest. Denying a person his liberty is a serious matter. Except in heinous offences, an arrest must be avoided. It would do if a police officer issues notice to the person to attend the Police Station, and not leave the Station without permission. (Joginder Kumar10). The Police Officer, carrying out the arrest of the arrestee, should prepare a memo of arrest at the time of arrest. Such a memo should be attested by atleast one witness, counter-signed by the arrestee and should contain the time and date of the arrest. An entry must be made in the diary, at the place of detention, regarding the arrest of the person which should also disclose the name of the person who has been informed of the arrest and copies of all documents, including the memo of arrest, should be sent to the Magistrate for his record. (D.K.Basu12). If a police officer misuses his power of arrest, he can be tried and punished under Section 166 IPC. (Lalita Kumari1).

41. Even in a civil dispute with an element of criminality, such as in the case of personal injury or trespass, police officers are entitled only to take action against the criminal element of the civil dispute, and not interfere with the civil dispute itself. For instance, if the personal injury in a civil dispute attracts the ingredients of Section 354 IPC, and trespass in a civil dispute attracts the provisions of Sections 447 and 448 IPC, then the information or the complaint received must be registered under Section 154(1) Cr.P.C, as they are cognizable offences, and an investigation should only be caused thereafter. Section 41(1)(a)&(b) CrPC enable a police officer to arrest, without an order from a Magistrate and without warrant, any person who has either committed or is alleged or is suspected to have committed a cognizable offence. This power is not to be exercised for the mere asking. Section 41 Cr.P.C. requires a police officer, before arresting any person, to be satisfied that such an arrest is necessary in terms of clauses (a) to (e) of Section 41(1)(b)(ii) Cr.P.C. It also requires him to record, while making such arrest, his reasons therefor in writing. (Sambangi Dhanunjaya Naidu. v. The State of A.P. rep. by its Principal Secretary, Home Department ). Even in civil disputes with an element of criminality, while the police officer can exercise his powers under Section 41 and 41-A CrPC during the course of investigation, he cannot adjudicate or resolve property/civil disputes. The power conferred, on respondents 3 and 4, was only to take action in respect of the allegations of the 5th respondent of a threat to her life from her brother as stated in her complaint dated 13.11.2013; or her being assaulted and intimidated by her brother and his brother-in-law as stated in her complaint dated 27.11.2013; and not to forcibly resolve the property disputes between the petitioner and the 5th respondent.

42. In his statement, made before the Joint Commissioner of Police on 01.12.2013, the 3rd respondent admitted that he had endorsed the complaint, which the 5th respondent gave to him on 13.11.2013, to the 4th respondent and had asked him to call both the parties and do justice; on 14.11.2013 the Inspector of Police, Sanjeeva Reddy Nagar P.S., had sent both the parties to his office where he had counselled them, but still the family matter was not settled; then both the parties sought further time, and decided to visit his office again on 19.11.2013; on 19.11.2013, even though both the parties arrived at his office and received counselling, they still could not resolve their serious differences. In his endeavour to justify his illegal acts of summoning the petitioner to his office, and in counselling him to resolve his property disputes with the fifth respondent, the 3rd respondent places reliance on Standing Order 322-1 of the A.P. Police Manual, and the circular memos of the Director General of Police regarding family counselling centres. The 3rd respondent sought to give an impression that the steps taken by him, in seeking to resolve the property disputes between the petitioner and the 5th respondent at his office on 14th and 19th November, 2013, is a family Counselling exercise.

43. On being asked why a memo dated 25.11.2013 was issued to the Deputy Commissioner, West Zone, regarding poor performance in family counselling centres in June, 2013, Learned Government Pleader for Home placed before this Court a copy of the Circular memo dated 21.02.2013 regarding establishment of family counselling centres in all Districts. By the said circular memo dated 21.02.2013, the Director General of Police informed all Commissioners/Superintendents of Police that the need of the hour was to establish a family counselling centre, at a centrally located place in the district, to provide easy access to the common people to solve their family issues; the family counselling centres should be constituted with experts from different fields, like representatives from Women & Child Welfare department, Municipal Corporation, retired Judges, NGOs, social activists, academics, retired police officers, Women organizations etc; and police officers should only have an advisory role as experts in such counselling centres, in addition to providing them logistics. All Commissioners and Superintendents of Police were directed to establish family counselling centres in the district/towns with immediate effect.

44. The circular memo dated 21.02.2013, issued by the Director General of Police, confers only an advisory role on serving police officers besides providing logistical support to the experts in these family counselling centres. These family counselling centres were required to be established at a centrally located place involving experts in different fields including retired judges, social workers, retired police officers etc. On a reading of the circular memo dated 21.02.2013 it is clear that police stations are not meant to be treated as family counselling centres, and serving police officers should not resort to family counselling, much less at their office or at a police station. The minutes, of the review meeting held on 23.05.2013, records the clarification of the Additional Director General of Police (Co-ordination) that there was no need for serving police officers to involve themselves in counselling sessions. It is evident, therefore, that not only has the 3rd respondent acted illegally and highhandedly in forcing the petitioner to come to the S.R.Nagar police station, and then in a police jeep to his office, but he has also sought to mislead this court that the counselling sessions at his office, on 14th and 19th November, 2013, has the sanction of the A.P. Police Manual Standing Orders and the circular memos referred to hereinabove.

V. THE POLICE RECORDS DO NOT CONTAIN ANY ENTRY REGARDING THE COUNSELLING SESSIONS CONDUCTED BY THE 3RD RESPONDENT AT HIS OFFICE ON 14TH AND 19TH NOVEMBER, 2013:

45. Principles of democracy and liberty demand a regular and efficient check on police powers. One way of keeping check is by documenting every action of theirs. A police station is required to maintain several records including the Case Diary under Section 172 CrPC; a General Diary under Section 44 of the Police Act, etc. which help in documenting every information collected, the spot visited and all other actions and activities of police officers. Under the CrPC, all actions of the police are written and documented. For example, in the case of arrest under Section 41(1)(b) of the Code, the arrest memo along with the grounds should be, mandatorily, in writing; under Section 55 CrPC, if an officer is deputed to make an arrest, then the superior officer should write down and record the offence, etc. for which the person is to be arrested; under Section 91 CrPC, a written order has to be passed, by the officer concerned, to seek documents; under Section 160 of the Code, a written notice has to be issued to the witness so that he can be called for recording of his/her statement; a seizure memo/panchnama has to be drawn for every article seized. (Lalita Kumari1); and, under Section 41-A(1), the police officer shall, in all cases where the arrest of a person is not required under Section 41(1), issue a notice directing the person, against whom a complaint of having committed a cognizable offence has been made, to appear before him.

46. The term General Diary (also called as Station Diary or Daily Diary in some States) is maintained not under Section 154 of the Code, but under Section 44 of the Police Act, 1861 in the States to which it applies, or under the respective provisions of the Police Act(s) applicable to a State or under the Police Manual of a State, as the case may be. (Lalita Kumari1). The General Diary is a record of all important transactions/events taking place in a police station, including departure and arrival of police staff, handing over or taking over of charge, arrest of a person, details of law and order duties, visit of senior officers, etc. In addition the gist of the FIR, or its substance, is also mentioned simultaneously in the General Diary since registration of FIR also happens to be an important event in the police station. (Lalita Kumari1).

47. A copy of the General Diary is not sent to the Judicial Magistrate, having jurisdiction over the police station, though its copy is sent to a superior police officer. It is not possible to keep a strict control of each and every FIR recorded in the General Diary by superior police officers, and/or court, in view of several other details being mentioned therein. There is no requirement of obtaining the signature of the complainant in the General Diary. What is recorded in the General Diary cannot be considered to be the fulfilment of, or compliance with, the requirement of Section 154 CrPC regarding registration of the FIR. However, since the General Diary/Station Diary/Daily Diary is the record of all information received in a police station, all information relating to cognizable offences, whether resulting in registration of the FIR or leading to an inquiry, must be mandatorily and meticulously reflected in the said diary, and the decision to conduct a preliminary inquiry must also be reflected therein. (Lalita Kumari1).

48. The General Diary Register of S.R. Nagar Police Station, from 20.09.2013 till 30.11.2013, has been placed before this Court. The G.D. entry, dated 27.11.2013 at 20.00 hours, records receipt of FIR No.936 of 2013, for offences under Sections 323, 506 and 509 IPC, and reads as under:-

At this time received a complaint from Smt.Reena Choudary W/o.late Ranjith Kumar, age 34 years, Occ: House wife, R/o.Flat No.203, Jaya Residency, Asmangadh, New Malakpet, Hyderabad in which she states that on 10.11.2013 at about 22.00 hours, while she along with DVS Ramanjaneyulu were returning from Kukatpally, when they reached at SR Nagar, in the mean time, her brother Garikapati Binod Chand Raj Gopal and his brother-in-law forcibly stopped their vehicle and they threatened her with dire consequence by slapping her. When she shouted they sped away from the spot. Later she mentioned that her brother promised to give her share of property and after the death of her father he failed to do so by keeping property documents with him and she was been threatened by her brother and his associates when she asked about her share in the property. Registered a case in Cr.No.936/13 U/s.323, 506, 509 IPC and took up investigation.
49. Curiously the General Diary Register makes no mention of either the representation submitted by the 5th respondent to the 3rd respondent on 13.11.2013, or to the petitioner being brought to the S.R. Nagar police station on 14.11.2013 or his being taken from there in a police jeep to the office of the 3rd respondent. No record also appears to have been maintained regarding the Counselling Sessions (which the petitioner was forced to participate) held, at the office of the DCP, West Zone, by the 3rd respondent on 14th and 19th November, 2014. But for the intervention of this Court, the counselling sessions at the office of the DCP, West Zone on 14th and 19th November, 2013 would have gone unnoticed and unchecked.
VI. POWER OF ADJUDICATION OF CIVIL/PROPERTY DISPUTES IS CONFERRED ONLY ON THE JUDICIARY AND NOT ON POLICE OFFICERS:

50. Maintenance of peace and public order, prevention of crime and investigation of cognizable offences are functions which Police Officers are, statutorily, obligated to discharge. While Section 154(1) Cr.P.C confers power, and casts a duty, on the police officer to register a cognizable offence, Section 155 Cr. P.C. enables a police officer to make an entry in the appropriate register, regarding information relating to a non-cognizable offence. He cannot investigate a non-cognizable offence without the order of the Magistrate. As a necessary corollary, any attempt by a police officer to investigate a complaint, which does not contain allegations of the commission of a cognizable offence, without permission from the Magistrate would violate Section 155(2) Cr.
P.C and is, ex facie, illegal. There is no presumption in law that every rift in human relations would lead to a civil dispute, and a civil dispute is likely to result in clashes resulting in offences against the human body. A Police Officer would not be justified in saying that he/she is examining a complaint which, ex facie, has the trappings of a civil dispute. (S. Masthan Saheb11). Even if a civil dispute has a criminal element, which falls within the ambit of a cognizable offence, with the potential of a law and order problem posing threat to the society at large, a Police Officer can take up investigation only after registering the complaint under Section 154 Cr.P.C. (Lakshmi @ Lakshmamma v. Commissioner of Police ).

51. The function of resolving civil disputes is entrusted to the judiciary. Police officers lack jurisdiction to interfere in civil/property disputes between two citizens. Even in criminal case, their role is limited to the registration of complaints and causing investigation. The power to adjudge whether or not an accused is guilty of having committed a criminal offence, and to convict and sentence him therefor, is vested exclusively in the judicial branch of the State. Judicial power cannot be exercised by agencies outside the judicial orbit and, where there is no legislative foundation for exercise of judicial power by a forum, it has no legal capacity to entertain requests for adjudication. Judicial power is a facet of sovereign power and can be conferred only by a Statute or by a Statutory instrument. It cannot be assumed suo motu. No authority may exercise adjudicatory powers absent a conferment of such powers by Statutory instruments. The coercive power of the State may not be employed to adjudicate disputes. (M/s. Janathaeem Industries Ltd., rep., by its Public Relations Officer M.S. Ganesan, Vijayawada. v. The District Collector, Krishna district at Vijayawada ).

52. While the inordinate delay, in resolution of civil disputes before Civil Courts of competent jurisdiction, is undoubtedly a cause of concern that does not justify Police Officers exercising powers, conferred exclusively of the judicial branch of the State, to adjudicate civil disputes. While the need to strengthen judicial institutions, and to reduce the inordinate delay in disposal of Civil Suits, cannot be over-emphasised, the highhanded acts of police officers in seeking to resolve civil disputes, that too in the precincts of a police station, must also be sternly dealt with. Just as Courts would not undertake investigation of criminal offences, as these are matters in the exclusive realm of the investigating agency, the powers conferred and the duties cast upon Police Officers, under the Criminal Procedure Code, is only to register complaints regarding cognizable offences and investigate thereinto; and not adjudicate even criminal cases, much less resort to settlement of civil disputes.

53. Police officers should not usurp, or even seem to usurp, judicial functions of adjudication or to summon and force persons to resolve their inter-se civil disputes in a particular manner under the guise of family counselling. In the present case the 3rd respondent has, in effect, donned the robes of a judge in adjudicating property disputes between the petitioner and the 5th respondent.

VII. CONTRADICTIONS IN THE STATEMENTS MADE BY THE FIFTH RESPONDENT FROM TIME TO TIME:

54. The contradictions in the complaint of the 5th respondent, on which the 3rd respondent had endorsed on 13.11.2013; her subsequent complaint dated 27.11.2013 which resulted in registration of Crime No.936 of 2013; and her assertions in the counter-affidavit filed before this Court; must also be noted. In her representation given to the 3rd respondent on 13.11.2013, the 5th respondent alleged that, on her asking him to divide their properties, her brother (the petitioner) and his brother-in-law had threatened to kill her; both of them had also threatened that, if she did not vacate the flat in Jaya Residency, they would kill her; her brother, his brother-in-law Raju and one Sivarao came inside her house and disconnected water supply; and even at Jaya Nagar, where she was staying, the petitioner, his brother-in-law and Sivarao had threatened to kill her. It is relevant to note that the representation of the 5th respondent, on which the 3rd respondent endorsed to the 4th respondent on 13.11.2013 asking him to do justice, makes no mention of an incident which allegedly took place three days prior thereto on 10.11.2013, though in her complaint dated 27.11.2013 the 5th respondent stated that, on 10.11.2013 at about 2200 hours, while she along with Sri DVS Ramanjaneyulu were returning from Kukatpally and had reached S.R. Nagar, her brother and his brother-in-law forcibly stopped their vehicle; threatened her with dire consequences, and slapped her; and she was being threatened by her brother and his associates as and when she asked him about her share in the property.

55. In her statement to the Joint Commissioner on 01.12.2013 the 5th respondent, while referring to the incident on 10.11.2013 at 10.00 p.m., only alleged that the petitioners brother-in-law Sri Raju had pulled her aside, and had slapped her; and her brother (the petitioner) had threatened her with dire consequences, with regards the property disputes. The statement of the 5th respondent, recorded by the Joint Commissioner of Police on 01.12.2013, makes no mention of her being assaulted by her brother on 10.11.2013. In her counter-affidavit before this Court, the 5th respondent stated that, on 10.11.2013 at 10.00 p.m, the petitioner and his brother-in-law had stopped their vehicle; the petitioners brother-in-law had slapped her, and her brother had beaten her black and blue.

56. The contradictions, in the statements made from time to time by the 5th respondent, do give an impression that a concocted complaint was hurriedly registered on 27.11.2013, after the petitioner had invoked the jurisdiction of this Court by way of the present Writ Petition on 26.11.2013, and after a copy of the Writ Petition was furnished to the office of the Government Pleader, High Court on the same day, only to avoid being faulted by this Court. As Crime No.936 of 2013, registered with S.R.Nagar Police Station on 27.11.2013, has, thereafter, been transferred to Central Crime Station, Hyderabad and re-registered as Crime No.182 of 2013, I refrain from saying anything more.

57. In his statement, before the Joint Commissioner on 01.12.2013, the 3rd respondent stated that the 5th respondent met him on 13th November, 2013 and had informed him that her brother and his brother-in-law had attacked them on 10.11.2013 at S.R.Nagar traffic signals; and he had endorsed the complaint to the fourth respondent asking him to call both parties and do justice. However the said complaint which the 5th respondent gave him, and on which he had made an endorsement to the 4th respondent on 13.11.2013, makes no mention of any incident having taken place on 10.11.2013, much less at Sanjeeva Reddy Nagar. Neither the 2nd respondent nor the Joint Commissioner of Police who conducted the enquiry have examined why an incident which allegedly took place on 10.11.2013, and forms the basis of registration of Crime No.936 of 2013 dated 27.11.2013, does not find mention in the 5th respondents representation given to the 3rd respondent on 13.11.2013, three days after the alleged incident on 10.11.2013. In his counter-affidavit filed before this Court, the 4th respondent states that he was telephonically instructed by the 3rd respondent not to register the complaint of the 5th respondent containing the endorsement of the 3rd respondent on 13.11.2013; and that he was asked by the 3rd respondent over telephone on 14.11.2013 to produce the petitioner before him at the office of the DCP, West Zone. It is disconcerting that, though the 3rd respondent admitted that he endorsed the complaint of the 5th respondent to the 4th respondent on 13.11.2013, the Joint Commissioner of Police should choose not to examine the 4th respondent or record his statement during the course of his enquiry.

VIII. PROPERTY DISPUTES BETWEEN THE PETITIONER AND THE FIFTH RESPONDENT ARE MATTERS TO BE ADJUDICATED BY A COMPETENT CIVIL COURT AND SHOULD NOT BE EXAMINED IN PROCEEDINGS UNDER ARTICLE 226 OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA:

58. In her counter-affidavit, the 5th respondent narrates in detail the property disputes between her and her brother (the petitioner);
she also claims that her brother forcibly vacated her from the flat where she was residing till August, 2008 and had put her in the house at plot No.49, Andhra Bank Colony with the intention of occupying all the flats; whenever he came to India he used to harass, abuse and beat her and ask her to sign on some documents to extinguish her legal rights over the properties; she had refused to do so; unable to bear his harassment, she had left his house and was staying in a rented house till May, 2013; since she is entitled for three flats in the complex, she had taken possession of flat Nos.101 and 102 and had given them on rent since September, 2013; when her brother came to know that she had occupied flat No.203, and had given flat Nos.101 and 102 on rent, he had sent his brother-in-law Sri G. Balraj who beat her, and slapped her minor daughter; and though she gave a police complaint, the 4th respondent stated that it was a civil dispute and could not be entertained. The affidavit details the claim of the 5th respondent to her share of the property. The 5th respondent alleges that the petitioner had suppressed relevant facts with regards property disputes; he had not paid maintenance and water charges for the five flats in his occupation; he is keeping all the original property documents with him, and did not want to give her legal share; and, as she was demanding her share of the properties, he has been harassing her with the aid and support of his brother-in-law. The 5th respondent narrates in detail her property disputes, and claims that the petitioner is seeking to deprive her of her just share of their ancestral property.

59. As the proper forum for adjudication of the property disputes, between the petitioner and the 5th respondent, is the Civil Court of competent jurisdiction, it would be wholly inappropriate for this Court, in proceedings under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, to examine much less determine the validity of the rival claims, of the petitioner and the 5th respondent, over their ancestral properties. It is made clear that, in case either the petitioner or the fifth respondent invoke the jurisdiction of the competent Civil Court, their respective claims shall be adjudicated on its merits without being influenced by any observations made in this Order. IX. OTHER CONTENTIONS:

60. It is the case of the 3rd respondent that the statement made by the petitioner before the Joint Commissioner on 01.12.2013 contradicts the allegations made by him in para 15 of the Writ Petition; in his statement the petitioner himself stated that he was not asked to sign any papers or any documents on 19.11.2013; and that no such incident took place is evident from the report of the Joint Commissioner of Police, and the report of the Committee.

61. In his statement, before Jt.CP (Admn.) on 01.12.2013, the petitioner stated that, on 14th of November, 2013 at around 1.00 PM, he received a call from Sri Ajay Kumar, Sub-Inspector Sanjeeva Reddy Nagar PS who asked him to come to the Police Station in connection with a complaint lodged by his sister; in response thereto, he went to the Police Station in a car; after he met the Sub-Inspector Sri Ajay Kumar, he was called to the chambers of the Inspector Sri Prabhakar who informed him that a complaint had been lodged by his sister and asked him to accompany the Sub-Inspector in the police jeep to the office of the DCP, West Zone, which he did; his car followed him to the office of the DCP, West Zone; he spent ten minutes with the 3rd respondent in his chambers where his sister and another were present; the 3rd respondent informed him that, though a complaint was lodged by his sister against him, he was not being treated as an accused; he was offered a chair; he was also informed that the complaint was about his threatening his sister; he was asked by the 3rd respondent to meet him again; on 19.11.2013 he received a call on his phone No.8096102190 from the office of the Deputy Commissioner of Police, West Zone; when he reached the office at about 2.45 pm he found persons not known to him in the office; his sister later appeared in the office of the DCP West Zone and raised the issue of property, alleging that he was not giving her property; his father had passed away without leaving behind any will; her share of the property had already been given to his sister, at the time of her marriage; whenever he came to India, he was being subjected to severe mental stress by his sisters tormenting words, asking for her share of the property; he was advised by people in the chambers of the DCP, West Zone to settle the property issue, as soon as possible, in accordance with the wishes of his sister; he was asked to be prepared to sign agreements of settlement to that effect; he was, however, not shown the papers or documents on which to sign; no one had manhandled him and no vulgar language was used; but he was pressurized that, if he did not settle the matter with his sister, he may enter into problems/cases related to property disputes as well as criminal cases out of his sisters complaints that he was harassing her; he left the office at about 9.30 pm; on 25th November, 2013, at about 4.30 P.M, a constable visited the house of his father-in-law at Marredpally, where he had been staying with his family since a few days; he was away and came to know later that the constable had asked for him, in connection with his sisters complaint at Sanjeeva Reddy Nagar PS, and had waited there upto 10 PM.

62. Even before the Joint Commissioner the petitioner stated that he was asked to be prepared to sign agreement of settlement of properties but was not shown the papers or documents on which to sign. He also stated that he was threatened that, if he did not settle the matter with his sister, he may face criminal cases out of his sisters complaint; and he was at the office of the 3rd respondent till 9.30 P.M. on 19th November, 2013. This Writ Petition was filed on 26.11.2013, the day next to 25.11.2013 when a constable is said to have asked for him.

X. CONCLUSION:

63. In his additional affidavit, the 3rd respondent states that an adverse memo dated 10.12.2013 has already been issued to him by the Commissioner of Police; he was also facing disciplinary action by the Government; several daily newspapers have made adverse reports against him with reference to the observations of the Court repeatedly; these facts were, inadvertently, missed in the earlier counter affidavit; and if this counter affidavit is not taken on record, and considered along with the earlier counter affidavit, he would suffer irreparable loss and injury. The 3rd respondent offers his unconditional apology if he has transgressed his limits in the course of his interaction with the petitioner and the 5th respondent.

64. While the 3rd respondent, in his statement before the Joint Commissioner, admits that both parties (the petitioner and the 5th respondent) received counselling at his office, he does not even state what the exercise of Counselling involved, and whether it related to resolution of property disputes between the petitioner and the 5th respondent. In the counter-affidavit filed before this Court, the 5th respondent admits that the 3rd respondent had counselled her and her brother regarding settlement of the property disputes. It is clear that the 3rd respondent has not only forced the petitioner to come to his office, but has also resorted to settlement of property disputes under the guise of family counselling. In asking the 4th respondent not to register the complaint given by the 5th respondent to the 3rd respondent on 13.11.2013, in orally summoning the petitioner to his office (office of the DCP, West Zone), in forcing him to come to his office on 14th and 19th November, 2013, and in counselling him at his office both on 14th and 19th November, 2013, the petitioners fundamental right of personal liberty, under Article 21 of the Constitution of India, has been violated by the 3rd respondent.

65. No person can be forcibly summoned to a police station except in accordance with law, including the provisions of the CrPC. Exercise of power by police officers, and the mode and manner of its exercise, is circumscribed by the provisions of the CrPC. Conferment of power is only to enable police officers to effectively discharge their statutory/legal obligations. Exercise of power, otherwise than in furtherance of a statutory/legal duty, is an abuse of power. In the present case, not only does the 3rd respondent lack the power to summon the petitioner to the police station, even without registering the complaint and without a written notice asking him to appear, he has also abused his office in carrying on a counselling session within the premises of the office of the DCP, West Zone, that too for resolution of a civil dispute regarding division of property between the petitioner and the 5th respondent.

66. The belated and half-hearted apology tendered by the 3rd respondent, with a rider that his apology was if he had transgressed his limits in the course of interacting with the petitioner or the 5th respondent, does not commend acceptance. It is not even the case of the 3rd respondent that the petitioner had voluntarily, and on his own accord, come to the S.R.Nagar Police Station on 14.11.2013 or that he had on his volition and free will, and without being directed by the police officers at S.R.Nagar P.S, come over to the office of the D.C.P., West Zone, to meet the 3rd respondent on 14.11.2013. Neither has the 3rd respondent admitted that his action in telephonically instructing the 4th respondent to direct the petitioner to come to S.R.Nagar Police Station, and to produce him at the office of the DCP, West Zone for counselling on 14th November, 2013 and in directing the petitioner to appear before him on 19th November, 2013 is illegal, nor has he assured this Court that he would refrain from indulging in such acts in future. I see no reason, therefore, to accept the apology of the 3rd respondent which is, evidently, made only to avoid being faulted by this Court. The illegal and high-handed acts of the 3rd respondent, depriving the petitioner of his fundamental right of personal liberty under Article 21 of the Constitution of India, cannot be ignored. The competent authority shall forthwith initiate major penalty proceedings against the 3rd respondent, conduct a departmental enquiry, and take disciplinary action in accordance with law. The entire exercise, culminating in a final order being passed by the competent authority, shall be completed within four months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order. This order shall not preclude the petitioner from claiming damages, for the violation of his fundamental rights by the 3rd respondent, in duly instituted legal proceedings.

67. While the 4th respondent cannot absolve himself of all blame on the specious plea that he had merely acted on the orders of the 3rd respondent, this Court must also bear in mind that the 4th respondent has, in his counter-affidavit filed before this Court, narrated the sequence of the events but for which the illegal and high-handed acts of the 3rd respondent may not have been established. The 4th respondent must constantly remind himself that his foremost obligation is to uphold the rule of law, notwithstanding the illegal orders of his superiors. It would suffice to warn the 4th respondent to desist from indulging in such acts in future.

68. This Court has only examined the illegal and high-handed acts of the 3rd respondent in orally summoning and counselling the petitioner at his office, to settle his property disputes with the 5th respondent, without even registering the complaint of the 5th respondent under Section 154(1) CrPC; and has not touched upon the property disputes between the petitioner and the fifth respondent. It is made clear that, while investigation in Crime No.182 of 2013 may be conducted in accordance with law and a final report submitted under Section 173 CrPC, the 3rd respondent shall not be involved either directly or indirectly in investigation or be consulted in the preparation and finalisation of the final report.

69. The Writ Petition is, accordingly, allowed with exemplary costs of Rs.10,000/- (Rupees Ten Thousand only). The costs should, ordinarily, have been paid to the petitioner. However, as he is employed in the U.S.A, and the genesis of this dispute is an internecine fight over vast extents of property, it is but appropriate that the cost of Rs.10,000/- is paid by the 3rd respondent to the Andhra Pradesh State Legal Services Authority, Hyderabad, within four weeks from the date of receipt of a copy of this Order. The miscellaneous petitions, if any pending, are also disposed of.

_______________________________ (RAMESH RANGANATHAN, J) Date: .04.2014.
================================================================================


================================================================================
CASE 19:
[Cites 51, Cited by 1]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
P. Chandra Mouli vs Govt. Of A.P., Dept. Of Home And Ors. on 24 March, 2005
Equivalent citations: 2005(4)ALD663, 2005(3)ALT162
ORDER
 

P.S. Narayana, J.
 

1. When the matter came up for admission and hearing at the request of the Counsel on record, the matter is taken up for final hearing where the Counsel made elaborate submissions and in view of the same, the Writ Petition is being disposed of finally at the stage of admission.

2. Sri P. Chandramouli, Assistant Commissioner of Police (now under suspension), filed the present Writ Petition questioning the Order made in O.A.No. 589/ 05 dated 24-2-2005 on the file of A.P. Administrative Tribunal, in short referred to as 'Tribunal" for the purpose of convenience. The Order impugned in the Writ Petition is as hereunder:

"In this O.A. the applicant is challenging the suspension order.
As per Rule 33 of APCS (CCA) Rules, the applicant has a right of appeal. Therefore, this OA is disposed of, with a direction to the applicant to prefer an appeal before the appellate authority within two weeks from to-day and on such appeal being filed, the respondents shall dispose of the same within six weeks thereafter."
In the aforesaid O.A. the writ petitioner/ applicant questioned the proceedings C.No. 36/02/2004 dated 1-2-2005 made by the 2nd respondent suspending the petitioner from service and the same reads as specified infra:

PROCEEDINGS OF THE DIRECTOR GENERAL AND INSPECTOR GENERAL OF POLICE, ANDHRA PRADESH, HYDERABAD PRESENT: SRI SWARANJIT SEN, IPS C. No. 36/2/2005 Dated: 1-2-2005 Sub: Police Services - Police Dept. -Sri P. Chandra Mouli, formerly ACP Banjara Hills, Hyderabad -Suspension from service - Orders issued.
ORDER Whereas it has come to the notice of the undersigned alleging that Sri P. Chandra Mouli, formerly ACP Banjara Hills, Hyderabad has exhibited grave misconduct, incorrigible, indifferent, indisciplined and irresponsible towards his legitimate duties and also he committed serious lapses in the matters relating to (1) Cr.No. 168/2004 U/s. 307 IPC, 25(1), 27 Arms Act of Jubilee Hills Police Station; (2) Case Cr. No. 704/04 Under Sections 406, 420 IPC of Bajara Hills Police Station; (3) Case in Cr.No. 42/2005 Under Sections 427, 447 IPC of Banjara Hills P. S. and (4) Cr.No. 17/2005 Under Sections 147, 148, 427, 323 IPC of Jubilee Hills Police Station and his conduct in matters relating to civil disputes, property disputes or handling of certain issues had been questionable on more than one occasion. He has also failed to supervise several important Criminal cases in his Sub-Division.
And whereas it is considered that his continuance in post will prejudice the disciplinary proceedings.
And whereas the undersigned after careful consideration of the available material and having due regard to the circumstances of the case, is satisfied that it is necessary to place Sri P. Chandra Mouli, formerly, ACP Banjara Hills, Hyderabad under suspension in the public interest.
Now, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by under Clause (a) of Sub-rule (1) of Rule 8 of A.P. Civil Services (CC&A) Rules, 1991 the undersigned hereby places the said Sri P. Chandra Mouli, formerly ACP Banjara Hills, Hyderabad, under suspension from the date of communication of his Order and he shall continue to be under suspension in public interest until the conclusion of the disciplinary proceedings.
It is further ordered that during the period of this Order remains in force, the headquarters of Sri P. Chandra Mouli, formerly ACP Banjara Hills, Hyderabad shall be at Hyderabad and the said Sri P. Chandra Mouli, formerly ACP Banjara Hills, Hyderabad, shall not leave the headquarters without obtaining the previous permission of the undersigned.
It is further ordered that during the period of suspension Sri P. Chandra Mouli, formerly ACP Banjara Hills, Hyderabad shall be paid subsistence allowance equivalent to the leave salary on half pay leave. The D.A. and other compensatory allowances shall be paid along with subsistence allowance. The quantum of subsistence allowance will be reviewed and revised in terms of F.R. 53 (1) and after 3 months. Pending review he shall continue to draw the subsistence allowance now sanctioned.
Sd/-
Director General and Inspector General of Police The 3rd respondent herein who is impleaded by name as 4th respondent, prior thereto, made and communicated the Order in No. L-003/11/5/2005 dated 17-1-2005, which reads as hereunder:
GOVERNMENT OF ANDHRA PRADESH (Police Department) Office of the Commissioner of Police, Hyderabad City.
 No. L&O/03/115/2005                                               Dated: 17-1 -2005
 

 MEMO
  

It is found that you have outlived your utility and your services are no longer required in the City Police as it is felt that your further continuation in the City Police is detrimental to public interest apart from creating bad image to the police. Hence, you are hereby directed to hand over charge to Sri M. Muralidhar Rao, A.C.P. Traffic and proceed to report in Chief Office with immediate effect.
Sri K. Muralidhar Rao, ACP, Traffic, Central Zone is hereby directed to immediately take over as A.C.P. Banjara Hills relieving Sri Chandra Mouli.
Report compliance to this memo.
Sd/-
Commissioner of Police, Hyderabad City.
3. Submissions made by Sri Gangaiah Naidu:

Sri Gangaiah Naidu, the learned Senior Counsel representing the writ petitioner would maintain that in the peculiar facts and circumstances, the Tribunal definitely erred in driving the party to invoke appellate remedy instead of considering the grounds which had been urged by the writ petitioner. The learned Counsel also would contend that the Order of suspension which had been impugned in the O.A. is not in conformity with the A.P. Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1991, in short referred to as "Rules". The learned Counsel had drawn the attention of this Court to Rule 8 in general and Rule 8(1 )(a) of the Rules in particular and would submit that on a prima facie reading of the impugned Order in the O.A. it is clear that the same was made by recording perverse reasons and definitely though the party who made the Order is competent to do so, had not applied his mind but had mechanically made the said Order at the instance of the 3rd respondent who was impleaded eo nomine as 4th respondent. The learned Counsel also made elaborate submissions relating to the specific plea of mala fides taken in this regard and also the way in which the Order had been made. The learned Counsel also in elaboration had explained the word or expression "ordinarily" employed in Section 20 of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 in short referred to as "Act" for the purpose of convenience. The learned Counsel also had referred to A.P. Police Manual in general and Order No. 175-1 in particular. The learned Counsel also placed reliance on Subramonian v. State of Kerala and Ors., 1973(1) SLR 521 (Kerala), State of Kerala v. K.C. George, 1984 (2) SLR 137 (Kerala) and In Re Dhiraj Kumar Roy Chowdhury, 1989 (4) SLR 720 (Calcutta).
4. Submissions made by the learned Advocate-General:

The learned Advocate General initially raised a preliminary objection relating to the very maintainability of the O.A. on the ground that an effective alternative remedy is available under Rule 33 of the Rules and hence in the light of the language employed in Section 20 of the Act, the O.A. itself is not maintainable since the same had been filed without exhausting the other remedies available under Rules and hence the Tribunal is well justified in refusing to entertain the same and driving the petitioner to invoke the remedy of statutory appeal provided under Rule 33 of the Rules. The learned Advocate General also had explained the scope and ambit of Sections 20 and 21 of the Act and further stressed on the limitations imposed on this Court while exercising powers of judicial review vis-a-vis the orders made by the Tribunal under Article 226 of the Constitution of India. Strong reliance was placed on S. S. Rathore v. State of M.P., . While elaborating his submissions the learned Advocate General also would contend that except stating that the appellate authority/ Government also had been influenced and hence no purpose would be served in preferring an appeal, no other substantial ground had been raised in this regard and this is the ground raised in a routine. Elaborate submissions were made on the ground of mala fides or malice. It was submitted that on the mere words which had been used in the Order impugned in the O.A. per se this Court may not come to the conclusion that the reasoning is perverse. Comment had been made to the effect that no mala fides as such had been attributed to the 2nd respondent and the 2nd respondent had not been impleaded eo nomine as a party. The 3rd respondent is not the competent authority who made the impugned Order and hence by mere impleading the 3rd respondent eo nomine as 4th respondent, would not alter the situation in any way. At any rate, it was contended that there is absolutely no proof of mala fides. Reliance was placed on M. Narasimhaiah v. Deputy Commissioner for Transport, Bangalore Division, , State of Punjab v. V.K. Khanna, 2000 (7) SCALE 731, Parbodh Sagar v. Punjab State Electricity Board, and State of Punjab v. Chaman Lal Goyal, in this regard.
5. Heard the learned Senior Counsel Sri Gangaiah Naidu and the learned Advocate General and also perused the material available on record.

6. Maintainability of the Writ Petition or O.A. in view of the alternative remedy of appeal available under the Rules:

Both the Counsel made submissions in elaboration. The Senior Counsel representing the writ petitioner is contending that in the peculiar facts and circumstances no purpose would be served in driving the writ petitioner to the remedy of appeal under Rule 33 of the Rules and on the contrary on such mere assertion the writ petitioner cannot be permitted to invoke the jurisdiction of the Tribunal straightaway by the learned Advocate General.
7. Act 13 of 1985 is an Act to provide for adjudication or trial by Administrative Tribunals of disputes and complaints with respect to recruitment and conditions of service of persons appointed to public services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union or of any State or of any local or other authority within the territory of India or under the control of the Government of India or of any corporation or society owned or controlled by the Government in pursuance of Article 323-A of the Constitution and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. Section 14 of the Act deals with Jurisdiction, powers and authority of the Central Administrative Tribunal. Section 15 of the Act deals with Jurisdiction, powers and authority of State Administrative Tribunals. Section 19 of the Act deals with Applications to Tribunals. Section 20 of the Act is dealing with Applications not to be admitted unless other remedies exhausted, reads as hereunder:

(1) A Tribunal shall not ordinarily admit an application unless it is satisfied that the applicant had availed of all the remedies available to him under the relevant service rules as to redressal of grievances.
(2) For the purposes of Sub-section (1), a person shall be deemed to have availed of all the remedies available to him under the relevant service rules as to redressal of grievances,-
(a) if a final Order has been made by Government or other authority or officer or other person competent to pass such Order under such Rules, rejecting any appeal preferred or representation made by such person in connection with the grievance; or
(b) where no final Order has been made by the Government or other authority or officer or other person competent to pass such Order with regard to the appeal preferred or representation made by such person, if a period of six months from the date on which such appeal was preferred or representation was made has expired.
(3) For the purposes of Sub-sections (1) and (2), any remedy available to an applicant by way of submission of a memorial to the President or to the Governor of a State or any other functionary shall not be deemed to be one of the remedies which are available unless the applicant had elected to submit such memorial."
Submissions at length were made on the strength of the language employed in Sections 20 and 21 of the Act. It is no doubt true that Sub-section (1) states "......the Tribunal shall not ordinarily admit an application unless it is satisfied that the applicant had availed of all the remedies available to him under the relevant service rules as to redressal of grievances." The term "ordinarily" in the context means generally, but not always in all cases. The provision does not bar the ultimate jurisdiction of the Administrative Tribunal but it only requires the party to exhaust the other remedies available. The aim of introducing this provision is to provide for an additional forum and certain opportunities to the redressal of grievances and to prevent short-circuiting of normal Departmental procedures specified under the service rules. In Kailash Chandra v. Union of India, while dealing with the interpretation of the words "should ordinarily be retained" in Rule 2046(2)(a) of Railway Establishment Code the Apex Court held that the intention is made clear and beyond by the use of the word "ordinarily" and ordinarily means in the large majority of cases, but not invariably. In the decision referred (4) supra, it was held at paras 16, 19 and 20 as hereunder:

"The Rules relating to disciplinary proceedings do provide for an appeal against the orders of punishment imposed on public servants. Some Rules provide even a second appeal or a revision. The purport of Section 20 of the Administrative Tribunals Act is to give effect to the Disciplinary Rules and the exhaustion of the remedies available thereunder is a condition precedent to maintaining of claims under the Administrative Tribunals Act. Administrative Tribunals have been set up for Government servants of the Centre and several States have already set up such tribunals under the Act for the employees of the respective States. The law is soon going to get crystallized on the line laid down under Section 20 of the Administrative Tribunals Act.
.......
.......
The question of consideration is whether it should be disposal of one appeal or the entire hierarchy of reliefs as may have been provided. Statutory guidance is available from the provisions of Sub-sections (2) and (3) of Section 20 of the Administrative Tribunals Act. There, it has been laid down:
"20.(2) For the purposes of Sub-section (1), a person shall be deemed to have availed of all the remedies available to him under the relevant service rules as to redressal of grievances,-
(a) If a final Order has been made by the Government or other authority or officer or other person competent to pass such Order under such rules, rejecting any appeal preferred or representation made by such person in connection with the grievance; or
(b) where no final Order has been made by the Government or other authority or officer or other person competent to pass such Order with regard to the appeal preferred or representation made by such person, if a period of six months from the date on which such appeal was preferred or representation was made has expired.
(3) For the purposes of Sub-sections (1) and (2), any remedy available to an applicant by way of submission of a memorial to the President or the Governor of a State or to any other functionary shall not be deemed to be one of the remedies which are available unless the applicant had elected to submit such memorial.
We are of the view that the cause of action shall be taken to arise not from the date of the original adverse Order but on the date when the Order of the higher authority where a statutory remedy is provided entertaining the appeal or representation is made and where no such Order is made, though the remedy has been availed of, a six months' period from the date of preferring of the appeal or making of the representation shall be taken to be the date when cause of action shall be taken to have first arisen. We, however, make it clear that this principle may not be applicable when the remedy availed of has not been provided by law. Repeated unsuccessful representations not provided by law are not governed by this principle."

This is a case where the Apex Court was considering the applicability of Article 113 of the Limitation Act, 1963 and also the date of first accrual of cause of action in relation to service disputes and Article 58 of the Limitation Act, 1963 and in the said context the doctrine of merger and applicability thereof to decisions of Department Tribunals had been discussed. The matter came up by way of Special Appeal as against a Judgment made in a Second Appeal. On a careful scrutiny of the facts, the said decision is distinguishable. While appreciating a precedent, the factual aspects and also the context in which the decision was rendered may also have to be taken into consideration. It is no doubt true that the Tribunal is having discretion, but however this discretion may have to be exercised judiciously and reasonably. In Punjab National Bank Ltd. v. Sri Ram Kunwar, AIR 1957 SC 276 while dealing with the aspect of exercising discretion vis-a-vis Industrial Tribunal it was held that the discretion is a judicial discretion and must be exercised according to the rules of reason and justice and not by chance or caprice or private opinion or some fanciful idea of benevolence or sympathy and it is a negation of justice and reason to direct one party to pay in advance the costs of the other party irrespective of the final result of the proceeding. In V. Vellaswamy v. Inspector General of Police, Tamil Nadu, Madras and Anr., the Apex Court while dealing with 'alternative remedy' held that existence of a right of review is no bar to entertain the Writ Petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India and hence the High Court is not justified in dismissing the Writ Petition solely on the ground that a review petition under Rule 15 of T. N. Police Subordinate Service (Discipline and Appeal) Rules, 1955 was open to the petitioner.

8. The existence of alternative remedy and exercising of power of judicial review under Articles 226 and 32 of the Constitution of India and the principles relating thereto are well settled. It is needless to say that in service matters the Tribunal is competent even to go into the validity of the provisions and the rules. Exercise of jurisdiction in this regard is just akin to Constitutional Courts exercising powers under Article 226 of the Constitution of India though this power of judicial review under Article 226 of the Constitution of India had been well retained on the ground that it is basic structure of the Constitution of India by virtue of the ratio laid down in Chandra Kumar v. Union of India, 1997 (3) Supreme 147. In the light of the peculiar facts and circumstances, especially when several details had been narrated under what circumstances the Order which had been impugned in the O.A. had been made, the judicial discretion on the part of the Tribunal would require examining the matter on merits instead of driving the writ petitioner to avail the statutory appeal provided under Rule 33 of the Rule. Hence, the bald proposition that under no circumstances whatever may be the reason explained, the O.A. cannot be entertained unless other remedies available under the service rules had been completely exhausted, may not be an acceptable proposition. It is suffice to state that this power is discretionary to be exercised in a given set of facts and circumstances.

9. Facts in Brief:

The writ petitioner entered the Police Department in the year 1976 as a Sub-Inspector of Police and was promoted as Inspector of Police and Deputy Superintendent of Police during the years 1983 and 1997 respectively and got accelerated promotions twice for his meritorious and outstanding performance and was given awards and rewards also. While working as Assistant Commissioner of Police/Deputy Superintendent of Police, Banjara Hills, Hyderabad from 1-1-2004, to his surprise 3rd respondent issued memo No. L&O/03/115/2005 dated 17-1-2005 directing him to hand over charge to one Sri Muralidhar Rao, A.C.P. alleging that the writ petitioner outlived his utility and his continuation in the City Police is detrimental to the public interest and creating bad image to the police. The specific stand taken by the writ petitioner both in the O.A. and also in the present Writ Petition is that the 3rd respondent exhibited his anguish in the Order itself to wreak vengeance against him due to the differences which they had while they were working at Warangal during the year 1991 and at that time the writ petitioner was Inspector of Police and the 3rd respondent was D.I.G., Warangal and during that time many police constables were killed by extremists, but as D.I.G. he did not make any arrangement even to get back the dead bodies of the deceased police personnel. This action infuriated the ill-feeling among the police personnel and the 3rd respondent presumed that the writ petitioner was responsible for the ill-feelings and hence he developed grudge against the writ petitioner and was waiting for an opportunity to wreak vengeance against him. The memo dated 17-1-2005 was no doubt challenged by filing O.A.No. 413/2005. It is further the specific stand taken by the writ petitioner that the 2nd respondent, at the instance of the 3rd respondent, who was impleaded eo nomine as 4th respondent, issued proceedings C.No. 36/02/2005 suspending the writ petitioner from service and the same was issued with a mala fide intention and due to personal grudge of the 4th respondent. It is also specifically stated that the Order of suspension was issued at the instance of the Government, appellate authority, in view of the pressure brought by the 4th respondent. The writ petitioner is neither the Investigating Officer nor connected directly with any of the cases mentioned in the Order of suspension. It was further stated that Cr.No. 168/2004 is the known case of the film actor Balakrishna. It is stated that after obtaining the draft charge-sheet it was directly supervised by the then Commissioner Sri R. P. Singh and the other superior officers regularly and the charge-sheet was filed by the Inspector one Y. Vijaya Kumar. The petitioner like other Officers only supervised the investigation in general in the remaining three cases cited also. The writ petitioner had raised several grounds reiterating the same stand taken in the O.A. to the effect that the reasons specified even in the Order of suspension would reflect the mala fides and apart from this aspect of the matter, there is total non-application of mind and the reasons have no nexus to the alleged impugned action and the other grounds in detail which had been raised and had referred to Rule 8 of the Rules and also Order No. 174-1 and Order No. 175-2 of the A.P. Police Manual.
10. It is pertinent to note that no counter-affidavit as such had been filed by the 4th respondent who was impleaded eo nomine as a party. The concerned Officer holding the office of the 3rd respondent at present denied the allegations. The 2nd respondent no doubt filed a counter affidavit in detail where all the allegations had been specifically denied. Specific stand was taken that on sufficient material available, the action was taken in public interest and other disciplinary proceedings would follow. This action was initiated against the writ petitioner basing on the report of the D.C.P. West Zone, Hyderabad, the immediate higher authority over the writ petitioner while he was Assistant Commissioner of Police, Banjara Hills Division.

11. It may be appropriate to have a look at certain portions of the counter-affidavit filed by the 2nd respondent. In para-6 of the counter-affidavit filed by the 2nd respondent it was stated:

"That the Deputy Commissioner of Police, West Zone submitted a report dt. 24-1-2005 to the 3rd respondent through Additional Commissioner of Police, Coordination mentioning about various allegations in which the petitioner was involved. The 3rd respondent forwarded the said report to the 2nd respondent for further action. The 2nd respondent taking into account the various allegations that are brought to his notice against the petitioner, in his discretion though it fit to place the petitioner under suspension in public interest by exercising the powers conferred upon him under Clause (a) of Sub-rule (1) of Rule 8 of A.P. Civil Services (CC&A) Rules, 1991 vide proceedings dt. 1-2-2005. The said suspension was ordered by the 2nd respondent in view of the contemplated disciplinary action against the petitioner. The petitioner challenged these proceedings also in O.A.No. 589/2005 before the Hon'ble Tribunal. It is curious to note that the 3rd respondent was arrayed in his personal capacity as 4th respondent in the O.A. though the impugned orders were passed by the 2nd respondent. At any time the Hon'ble Tribunal, having regard to the fact that there is a provision available for the petitioner to avail statutory appeal under Rule 33 of A.P. Civil Services (CC&A) Rules, 1991, disposed of the O.A. on 24-2-2005 directing the petitioner herein to prefer an appeal before the Appellate Authority within 2 weeks from the date of the Order and further it was directed that the same be disposed of within 6 weeks thereafter. The said orders of the Hon'ble Tribunal are challenged in the present Writ Petition by the Petitioner."
Likewise, at para 9 of the counter-affidavit, it was specifically stated:

"That it is settled law that in the matter of suspension, the Tribunals/Courts would be slow in interfering and the scope of judicial review is very limited. As malice is one of the grounds to attack suspension the writ petitioner has chosen to bring that aspect into the present matter though factually the same is not correct. It is necessary to note that the impugned orders of suspension have been passed by the 2nd respondent and he is not made as a party by name and only to bring the concept of malice the petitioner impleaded the 3rd respondent and also arrayed him as 4th respondent by name. In so far as suspension Order dt. 1-2-2005 is concerned, the same having been passed by the 2nd respondent there is absolutely no necessity to implead the 3rd respondent and it is further absolutely unnecessary to make wild allegations against the 4th respondent. It is curious to note the orders that have been issued by the 3rd respondent against the petitioner i.e., proceedings dated 17-1-2005 have been challenged before the Hon'ble Tribunal in O.A.No. 413/2005 but he was not arrayed by name in the said O.A. but has been arrayed by name in this Proceedings before the Hon'ble Tribunal and Hon'ble High Court only to develop the case under the guise of malice."
In para-12 of the counter-affidavit it was stated:

".........It is submitted that, the Dy. Commissioner of Police, West Zone, reported the serious lapses committed by the petitioner, (who was then working as Asst. Commissioner of Police, Banjara Hills Division) and requested to take stringent disciplinary action against the petitioner, in the public interest, as the actions of the petitioner, such as involving in civil disputes, property disputes highly objectionable and against the rules and detrimental to the maintenance of public order. The Commissioner of Police, Hyderabad reviewed the issue with other Police officers working in Hyderabad City. The Banjara Hills Sub-Division held by the petitioner is habitated by the elite citizens of Hyderabad City and most of them are top level bureaucrats, many of the Council of Ministers, politicians and businessmen. The policing in that part of the city requires to be done with utmost patience and care without giving room to any adverse criticism. It has come to the notice of the Dy. Commissioner of Police, West Zone, that the petitioner miserably failed to provide leadership to the officers and men working under his jurisdiction and his conduct in the matter relating to settlement of civil disputes, property disputes etc., have been questionable on many a occasion, the petitioner also failed to supervise the investigation of several criminal cases of division. It is a figment of imagination on the part of the petitioner, and attributed irrelevant matters to the present issue in Order to cover up his lapses and to conceal and camouflage his misconduct and irresponsible acts in day-to-day policing in Banjara Hills Division. The action taken by me in issuing impugned orders is based on the material available and with independent and open mind. I was neither influenced by the 3rd respondent nor by any other officer and it is highly improbable contention as the question of 3rd respondent influencing me does not arise as he is subordinate to me. The contention with regard to animosity of the 3rd respondent against him has nothing to do with the present suspension orders issued by me."
It was further stated in para -13 that:

".........it is submitted that, the petitioner while working as Asst. Commissioner of Police, Banjara Hills Division, has exhibited grave misconduct, incorrigible, indifferent, indisciplined and irresponsible behaviour towards his legitimte duties and also committed serious lapses in the matters pertinent to the following criminal cases:
(1) Cr.No. 168/2004 Under Section 307 IPC, 25(1), 27 of Indian Arms Act 1955 of Jubilee Hills PS. (2) Cr.No. 704/04 Under Section 406, 420 IPC of Banjara Hills PS. (3) Cr.No. 42/2005 Under Section 427, 447 IPC of Banjara Hills PS. (4) Cr.No.. 17/2005 Under Section 147, 148, 427, 323 IPC of Jubilee Hills PS. The petitioner's conduct in matters relating to civil disputes, property disputes and handling of certain issues of policing had been questionable on many a occasion. It was contemplated to initiate disciplinary proceedings against the petitioner in the right earnest and it was considered that his continuance in service will prejudice the disciplinary proceedings. Accordingly the 2nd respondent, after careful consideration of available material and having due regard to the circumstances of the whole issue, and in exercise of powers conferred on him by Clause (a) of Sub-rule (1) of Rules 8 r/w. Rule 13 SI.No. 17(B) of the table of the A.P. Civil Services (CC&A) Rules, 1991, has placed the petitioner under suspension in public interest till disciplinary proceedings are completed. It is incorrect on the part of the petitioner to attribute mala fide intention and personal grudge to the 4th respondent and the same on the part of petitioner is malicious and baseless."
Likewise, at para-25 of the counter-affidavit it was specifically pleaded:

".......it is stated that it is absolutely false to state that the suspension orders were served on the petitioner's son on 2-2-2005 and as a matter of fact the orders were served on the petitioner on 2-2-2005 and the concerned official i.e., Inspector of Police, Banjara Hills Police Station, Hyderabad who has served the copy upon the petitioner has specifically mentioned that he refused to put the date though he has received and singed on the duplicate copy. The petitioner was reluctant to receive the suspension Order and he went to the extent of giving a false statement before this Hon'ble Court. It is equally incorrect to contend that the 3rd respondent was involved and as he was inimical against the petitioner he has gone to this extent. It is once again reiterated that the 3rd respondent has nothing to do with the suspension Order and there is absolutely no necessity for the petitioner to bring the 3rd respondent into picture and distort the facts. No Press meet was conducted by the 3rd respondent and the question of 3rd respondent recommending for his suspension does not arises and at any rate the 2nd respondent need not oblige for the recommendations of the 3rd respondent being superior in rank and also being disciplinary authority the 2nd respondent has passed orders keeping in view the material on record and with an independent mind and as there are no allegations of mala fides against the 2nd respondent the Writ Petition deserves to be dismissed on that ground alone."
It was also pleaded in para-27 that:

"......It is stated that the petitioner is confused and/or is trying to confuse this Hon'ble Court by stating that he was appointed as Deputy Superintendent of Police under Rule 11 (25)(1) of A.P. Civil Services (CC&A) Rules, 1991. The question of Deputy Superintendent of Police being appointed under A.P. Civil Services (CC&A) Rules, 1991 is a misconceived notion. As a matter of fact G.O.Ms. No. 424, dated 30-11-1996 does not refer to that. Rule 11 talks of disciplinary authorities in State services and under Rule 11 (25)(1) of A.P. Civil Services (CC&A) Rules, 1991, no doubt it is the Deputy Inspector General of Police who is competent to impose minor punishment under Rule 9 on Deputy Superintendents of Police. Presently no punishment is imposed upon him and it only a suspension contemplating disciplinary proceedings under Rule 8(1 )(a) and the contention of the petitioner that the suspension is under Clause (5) of Rule 9 and therefore the 2nd respondent cannot pass orders of suspension and that he is not authorized to do so is a very farfetched argument/contention. First of all Rule 25 refers to Deputy Inspector General of Police whereas the 2nd respondent is the Director General of Police. Secondly Rule 9 deals with punishments and the suspension under Rule 9(5) is a different kind of suspension under minor punishments but not suspension under Rule 8(1 )(a). Further as the 2nd respondent being the Head of the Department is Competent Authority to suspend the petitioner, which is clear from Rule 13 of A.P. Civil Services (CC&A) Rules, 1991. The petitioner comes under State services. Rule 13 deals with authorities competent to suspend members of State services. It is specifically mentioned that second level Gazetted Post Officers can be suspended by the Heads of the Department concerned. Deputy Superintendent of Police is a second level Gazetted Post and therefore the 2nd respondent has the jurisdiction and authority to suspend the petitioner. In view of the matter the whole contention of the petitioner in this regard is misconceived and deserves to be rejected."
The other allegations also had been specifically denied in the counter-affidavit and stand was taken that the reasons are not vague or baseless, but based on material.

12. Relevant Statutory provisions: Rule 8 of the Rules referred to supra which had been framed in exercise of powers conferred by the proviso of Article 309 of the Constitution of India dealing with Suspension reads as hereunder:

(1) A member of a Service may be placed under suspension from service-
(a) where a disciplinary proceeding against him is contemplated or is pending, or
(b) when in the opinion of the authority competent to place the Government servant under suspension, he has engaged himself in activities prejudicial to the interest of the security of the State, or
(c) where a case against him in respect of any criminal offence is under investigation, inquiry or trial;
(d) A member of a service may be placed under suspension from service even if the offence from which he was charged does not have bearing on the discharge of his official duties.
(2) A Government servant shall be deemed to have been placed under suspension by an Order of the authority competent to place him under suspension-
(a) with effect from the date of his detention, if he is detained in custody, whether on a criminal charge or otherwise for a period exceeding forty eight hours,
(b) with effect from the date of his conviction if, in the event of a conviction for an offence, he is sentenced to a term of imprisonment exceeding forty-eight hours and is not forthwith dismissed or removed or compulsorily retired consequent to such conviction.
Explanation: The period of forty-eight hours referred to in Clause (b) of this Sub-rule shall be computed from the commencement of the imprisonment after the conviction and for this purpose, intermittent periods of imprisonment, if any, shall be taken into account.

(c) the Order of suspension cease to be operative as soon as the criminal proceedings, on the basis of which the Government servant was arrested and released on bail; are terminated.

(3) Where a penalty of dismissal, removal of compulsory retirement from service imposed upon a Government servant under suspension is set aside in appeal or on revision or review under these rules and the case is remitted for further inquiry or action or with any other directions, the Order of his suspension shall be deemed to have continued in force on and from the date of the original Order of dismissal, removal, or compulsory retirement and shall remain in force until further orders.

(4) Where a penalty of dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement from service imposed upon a Government servant is set aside or declared or rendered void, in consequence of or by a decision of a Court of law and the authority competent to impose the penalty, on a consideration of the circumstances of the case, decides to hold a further inquiry against him on the allegations on which the penalty of dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement was originally imposed, the Government servant shall be deemed to have been placed under suspension by the authority competent to impose the suspension from the date of the original Order of dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement and shall continue to remain under suspension until further orders:

Provided that no such further inquiry shall be ordered unless it is intended to meet a situation where the Court has passed an Order purely on technical grounds without going into the merits of the case.
(5)(a) An Order of suspension made or deemed to have been made under this Rule shall continue to remain in force until it is modified or revoked by the authority which made or is deemed to have made the Order or by an authority to which that authority is subordinate.
(b) Where a Government servant is suspended or is deemed to have been suspended, whether in connection with any disciplinary proceeding or otherwise, and any other disciplinary proceeding is commenced against him during the continuance of that suspension, the authority competent to place him under suspension may, for reasons to be recorded by him in writing, direct that the Government servant shall continue to be under suspension until the termination of all or any of such proceedings.
(c) An Order of suspension made or deemed to have been made under this Rule may, at any time, be modified or revoked by the authority which made or is deemed to have made the Order or by any authority to which that authority is subordinate."
Strong reliance was placed on Rule 8(1 )(a) which specifies:

"a member of a service either placed under suspension from service where a disciplinary proceeding against him is contemplated or is pending........"
Order No. 174-1 of A.P. Police Manual dealing with suspension pending enquiry, reads as hereunder:

Suspension should be resorted only when it is necessary in public interest or while investigation into grave charges against the officer. Under the CC & A Rules a member of service may be placed under suspension.
A. Where a disciplinary proceeding against him is contemplated or is pending (Form-23), or B. Where in the opinion of the authority competent to suspend, has engaged himself in activities prejudicial to the interest of the security of the State (Form-24), or C. Where a case against him for any offence is under investigation, enquiry or trial (Form-25).
Likewise, Order No. 175-1 of the said A.P. Police Manual dealing with Competent Authority to suspend specifies as hereunder:
As per item 17 in Rule 13 of APCS (CC & A) Rules, 1991, members of the State services holding initial gazetted posts are to be suspended by the heads of departments concerned but as per Rule 15 of same rules, the appointing authority or the superior to such authority may also place under suspension any member of service under Rule 8 of APCS (CC & A) Rules. Therefore, the orders of the head of the department shall be obtained before suspending any initial gazetted officer to satisfy the Rule position."
It is no doubt that G.O.Ms. No. 201, Home, Police Department, dated 8-9-2001 specifies that the Manual does not supersede any statutory Service Rules, Regulations and other orders issued by the Government from time to time and if there is any contradiction or conflict, the latter will prevail. In the light of the same, it is needless to say that Rule 8 alone may have to prevail over the aforesaid provisions of the A.P. Police Manual referred to supra. In State of Assam v. B.K. Das, it was held that the memorandum raising the age of retirement from 55 to 58 years being a mere executive instruction and not being a Rule under Article 309 of the Constitution of India does not confer a legal right on persons covered by it and therefore no legal action can be founded on it.
13. Mala fide action: This is yet another ground of attack on which rival submissions in elaboration had been made by both the Counsel representing the respective parties. Express or implied, direct or indirect mala fides, otherwise known as malice in fact and malice in law, no doubt may have to be proved by the person asserting such a ground. The particulars of the allegations in relation thereto had been made in the O.A. and also in the present Writ Petition and no doubt the same had been specifically denied. It is pertinent to note at this juncture itself that the Order which had been impugned in the O.A. was preceded by an Order of transfer said to be an Order of surrender made by the 3rd respondent. It is no doubt difficult to establish the ground of mala fides. Submissions at length were made that the impugned Order in the O.A. was made by the 2nd respondent and not by the 3rd respondent and the 2nd respondent was not made party eo nomine but the 3rd respondent was made a party eo nomine as 4th respondent, but it is pertinent to note that the specific stand taken by the writ petitioner is that the 3rd respondent influenced the decision making process by virtue of which the 2nd respondent made the suspension order. The report of the 5th respondent surprisingly had not been referred to in the Order of suspension made by the 2nd respondent. Doctrine of mala fides having impact on the decision making process cannot be totally ignored by Courts in the realm of administrative law. Every aspect, if clear, though not direct, may have to be taken note of, lest it would result in unjust decisions vitiated by technicalities. Scrutiny in this sphere to be more careful than in cases of direct mala fides. If direct mala fides alleged if any are very remote and having a wider gap not having any nexus, the same should not be considered. In State of Bihar v. P. P. Sharma, it was held:

"Mala fide means want of good faith, personal bias, grudge, oblique or improper motive or ulterior purpose. The administrative action must be said to be done in good faith, if it is in fact done honestly, whether it is done negligently or not. An act done honestly is deemed to have been done in good faith. An administrative authority must, therefore, act in a bona fide manner and should never act for an improper motive or ulterior purposes or contrary to the requirements of the statute, or the basis of the circumstances contemplated by law, or improperly exercised discretion to achieve some ulterior purpose. The determination of a plea of mala fide involves two questions, namely (i) whether there is a personal bias or an oblique motive; and (ii) whether the administrative action is contrary to the objects, requirements and conditions of a valid exercise of administrative power."
In E. P. Royappa v. State of Tamil Nadu, it was observed at para 92:

"We must not also overlook that the burden of establishing mala fides is very heavy on the person who alleges it. The allegations of mala fides are often more easily made than proved, and the very seriousness of such allegations demands proof of a high Order of credibility. Here the petitioner, who was himself once the Chief Secretary, has flung a series of charges of oblique conduct against the Chief Minister. That is in itself a rather extraordinary and unusual occurrence and if these charges are true, they are bound to shake the confidence of the people in the political custodians of power in the State, and therefore, the anxiety of the Court should be all the greater to insist on a high degree of proof. In this context it may be noted that top administrators were often required to do acts which affect others adversely but which are necessary in the execution of their duties. These acts may lend themselves to misconstruction and suspicion as to the bona fides of their author when the full facts and surrounding circumstances are not known. The Court would, therefore, be slow to draw dubious inferences from incomplete facts placed before it by a party, particularly when the imputations are grave and they are made against the holder of an office which has a high responsibility in the administration. Such is the judicial perspective in evaluating charges of unworthy conduct against ministers and other high authorities, not because of any special status which they are supposed to enjoy, nor because they are highly placed in social life or administrative set up - these considerations are wholly irrelevant in judicial approach - but because otherwise, functioning effectively would become difficult in a democracy......"
On the aspect of non-impleading of the 2nd respondent eo nomine as a party, strong reliance was placed on the decision referred (8) supra, wherein the Apex Court observed at para 8 as hereunder:

"Now coming to the grounds given by the High Court, it may be pointed out at the very outset that the High Court was factually in error in holding - or in proceeding on the assumption, as the case may be - that the report of the Sub-Divisional Magistrate had exonerated the respondent of any responsibility or culpability. The report, as stated above, neither exonerates the respondent nor does it hold him responsible or guilty. It looks probable that the High Court was misled into believing that the said report has exonerated the respondent. Not only that. There is the earlier report of the Inspector General of Prisons, which was submitted within one week of the incident. It holds the respondent responsible for the said incident, no doubt, along with other prison officials, Indeed, the Inspector General of Prisons had recommended the suspension of the respondent and a few other officials. In this state of facts, it may not be correct to assume that the Government had dropped the idea of proceeding against the respondent and that it changed its mind later. It is one thing to say that the Government was guilty of inaction and an altogether different thing to say that it had dropped the matter in view of the Sub-Divisional Magistrate's report - but then revised its opinion later for reasons which are suggested to be not fair. Now coming to the charge of mala fides also, it must be stated that the said charge was made in a vague manner in the writ petition. It was not specified which officer was ill-disposed towards the respondent and how and in what manner did he manage to see that the charges are served upon the respondent when the respondent's case was to come up for consideration for promotion. The appellants say that the respondent's case was not to come up for consideration for promotion in the year 1992 at all - not even in 1993. It is also stated by the learned counsel for the appellants that pursuant to the impugned order, the respondent's case was considered by the DPC but it found him not fit for promotion. Be that as it may, in the absence of any clear allegation against any particular official and in the absence of impleading such person eo nomine so as to enable him to answer the charge against him, the charge of mala fides cannot be sustained. It is significant to notice that the respondent has not attributed any mala fides to the Inspector General of Prisons who made his report dated 9-1-1987. In this report, the inspector General of Prisons had found that respondent responsible for the incident - relevant portions extracted hereinbefore - and recommended his suspension pending enquiry.
In State of Madhya Pradesh v. Ashok Deshmukh, the Apex Court held at paras 11 and 12 as hereunder:
"With respect to the High Court it has to be stated that having observed that there was no material to support the allegation of any bias and mala fide on the part of the Secretary to the Government it committed an error in assuming that the basis of impugned Order of repatriation could only be the displeasure of his superiors which the 1st respondent had incurred by reason of the wrong complaints of a Member of the Legislative Assembly. It is significant that the Order is silent about the names of those superiors who were displeased on account of the allegations said to have been made by the Member of the Legislative Assembly. This part of the Order of the High Court is based on mere surmise. The High Court overlooked that the allegations of bias and mala fides are easily made but when it comes to the question of proof of such allegations, very often there will be no material in support of them. This is one such case. If mere existence of some allegations against an officer which on inquiry had been found to be untrue is to be treated as the basis for quashing any Order of transfer or repatriation made in respect of any officer then almost every such Order of transfer or repatriation would have to be quashed because there would always be some complaint by some party or other against every officer. Unless the Court is sure that the impugned Order is really based upon such allegations it should not proceed to quash administrative orders which are made in the exigencies of the administration.
The counter-affidavit filed on behalf of the State Government before the High Court also shows that some other officers who had been posted on deputation like the 1st respondent also had been reverted to their parent department and again some of them had been posted back as Block Development Officers. Perhaps even in the case of the 1st respondent a similar Order posting him back as Block Development Officer would have been passed by the State Government had he not filed the suit and then the writ petition making it difficult for the State Government to take a decision on the question of again posting him as a Block Development Officer during the pendency of the proceedings. The impugned Order of repatriation passed in respect of the 1st respondent does not on the face of it show that there is any stigma attached to the 1st respondent by reason of the said order. We are clearly of the opinion that the allegations of bias and mala fides made against Smt. Nirmala Buch have remained unsubstantiated. The 1st respondent h ad no vested right to continue on deputation as Block Development Officer. On the material placed before us we do not find that the Order of repatriation is arbitrary and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution. We, therefore, find it difficult to agree with the High Court. The Order passed by the High Court is therefore liable to be set aside. It is quite possible that the 1st respondent may again be sent on deputation as Block Development Officer. That however, is within the discretion of the State Government.
In the decision referred (7) supra, while dealing with the aspect of mala fides it was held at para 13 as hereunder:
"As noted above, the High Court has not highlighted this aspect of the matter, though the same were brought to the notice of the High Court, we do not know for what reasons, neither we intend to delve into it but the fact remains that the comment of the learned Advocate appearing for the Board during the course of hearing before this Court that the litigations spirit of the petitioner has, in fact brought into effect the exercise of jurisdiction of the writ Court to a ludicrous extent. We do find some justification in the criticism of the learned Advocate for the Board vis-a-vis the conduct of the petitioner/ appellant herein. The petitioner has been, as noted above, from 1989 onwards engaged himself in the law Courts rather than exerting himself in an effort to improve his capability as the employee of the Board so that the Board and the State obtain maximum benefit from out of the services of the petitioner-appellant but unfortunately his litigatious spirit prevailed upon him and as noticed above we do find some justification as regards the comment made by the learned Advocate appearing for the Board. Mala fides have been alleged against the statutory Board (Punjab State Electricity Board) but the contextual fact negates such an allegation. Incidentally, be it noted that the expression 'mala fide' is not a meaningless jargon and it had its proper connotation. Malice or mala fides can only be appreciated from the records of the case in the facts of each case. There cannot be possibly be any set guidelines in regard to the proof of mala fides. Mala fides, where it is alleged, depend upon its own facts and circumstances. We ourselves feel it expedient to record that the petitioner had become more a liability than an asset and in the event of there being such a situation vis-a-vis an employee, the employer will be within its liberty to take appropriate steps including the cessation of relationship between the employer and the employee. The service conditions of the Board's employees also provides for Voluntary Retirement, a person of the nature of the petitioner, as more fully detailed herein before, cannot possibly be given any redress against the Order of the Board for Voluntary Retirement. There must be factual support pertaining to the allegations of mala fides, unfortunately there is none. Mere user of the word 'mala fide' by the petitioner would not by itself make the petition entertainable. The Court must scan the factual aspect and come to its own conclusion i.e., exactly what the High Court has done and that is the reason why the narration have been noted in this judgment in extenso. Tampering of the Annual Confidential Rolls have been alleged but there is no evidence in regard thereto or even to link up the two private respondents therewith. While it is true that the earlier relationship between an employer and employee or between the employees was that of mutual trust, confidence or welfare, presently the situation in general stands polluted and may be even one degree higher than the pollution of the environment, but that does not however clothe the Court to come to a conclusion of mala fide without there being any evidence being made available to the Court."
Reliance also was placed on the decision referred (6) supra in this regard. While dealing with the aspect of mala fides and burden of proof in Delhi Development Authority v. UEE Electricals Engg. (P) Ltd., it was held at para 16:

"Doubtless, he who seeks to invalidate or nullify any act or Order must establish the charge of bad faith, an abuse or a misuse by the authority of its powers. While the indirect motive or purpose, or bad faith or personal ill-will is not to be held established except on clear proof thereof, it is obviously difficult to establish the state of a man's mind, for that is what the employee has to establish in this case, though this may sometimes be done. The difficulty is not lessened when one has to establish that a person apparently acting on the legitimate exercise of power has, in fact, been acting mala fide in the sense of pursuing an illegitimate aim. It is not the law that mala fide in the sense of improper motive should be established only by direct evidence. But it must be discernible from the Order impugned or must be shown from the established surrounding factors which preceded the order. If bad faith would vitiate the order, the same can, in our opinion, be deduced as a reasonable and inescapable inference from proved facts. It cannot be overlooked that burden of establishing mala fides is very heavy on the person who alleges it. The allegations of mala fides are often more easily made than proved, and the very seriousness of such allegations demands proof of a high Order of credibility. As noted by this Court in P. P. Royappa v. State of Tamil Nadu and Anr. ."
In Union of India v. Kuldeep Singh, while dealing with the expression 'discretion' it was held at paras 20, 21 and 24 as hereunder:

"When anything is left to any person, Judge or Magistrate to be done according to his discretion, the law intends it must be done with sound discretion, and according to law. (See Tomlins's Law Dictionary) In its ordinary meaning, the word "discretion" signifies unrestrained exercise of choice or will; freedom to act according to one's own judgment; unrestrained exercise of will; the liberty of power of acting without other control than one's own judgment. But, when applied to public functionaries, it means a power or right conferred upon them by law, of acting officially in certain circumstances according to the dictates of their own judgment and conscience, uncontrolled by the judgment or conscience of others. Discretion is to discern between right and wrong; and therefore whoever hath power to act at discretion, is bound by the Rule of reason and law, (See Tomlin's Law Dictionary).
Discretion, in general, is the discernment of what is right and proper. It denotes knowledge and prudence, that discernment which enables a person to judge critically of what is correct and proper united with caution; nice discernment, and judgment directed by circumspection; deliberate judgment; soundness of judgment; a science or understanding to discern between falsity and truth, between wrong and right, between shadow and substance, between equity and colorable glosses and presences, and not to do according to the will and private affections of persons. When it is said that something is to be done within the discretion of the authorities, that something is to be done according to the rules of reason and justice, not according to private opinion; according to law and not humour. It is to be not arbitrary, vague, and fanciful, but legal and regular. Ant it must be exercised within the limit, to which an honest man, competent to the discharge of his office ought of confine himself (Per Lord Halsbury, L.C., in Sharp v. Wakefield, (1891) Appeal Cases 173). Also See S. G. Jaisinghani v. Union of India and Ors. .
Such discretion is usually given on matters of procedure or punishment, or costs of administration rather than with reference to vested substantive rights. The matters which should regulate the exercise of discretion have been stated by eminent judges in somewhat different forms of words but with substantial identity. When a statute gives a judge a discretion, what is meant is a judicial discretion, regulated according to the known rules of law, and not the mere whim or caprice of the person to whom it is given on the assumption that he is discreet (Per Willes J. in Lee v. Bude Torrington Junction Railway Co., (1871) LR 6 CP 576, and in Morgan v. Morgan, 1869, LR 1 P & M 644)."
In Medley Minerals India Ltd. v. State of Orissa, it was observed that it is trite that plea of mala fides has to be specific and demonstrable and the person against whom the mala fides are alleged must be made a party to the proceedings and given reasonable opportunity of hearing.

The undernoted decisions also may be usefully referred to in this context:

Barium Chemicals Limited v. Company Law Board, 1967 SC 295 Collector (District Magistrate) Allahabad v. Raja Ram Jaiswal, , Regional Manager v. Pawan Kumar Dubey, , Jaichand Lal Sethia v. State of West Bengal, and Express Newspapers Private Limited v. Union of India., .
14. Certain of the principles which may be enumerated in relation to the ground of mala fides may be as hereunder:

(1) Arbitrary exercise of power; (2) Improper exercise of discretion for apparent reasons; (3) Perverse reasons (4) Authority exercising excess or abuse of power for extraneous purpose; (5) Reasonable and inescapable inference even in the absence of proof by direct evidence; (6) Order made without application of mind; (7) Order made for a purpose other than mentioned on the face of the order. These principles are no doubt illustrative but not exhaustive.
15. As already referred to supra, submissions at length were made on the ground that the impugned Order was made by the 2nd respondent and the 2nd respondent was not impleaded as a party eo nomine. It is pertinent to note that the specific ground is that at the instance of the 4th respondent, who had been impleaded eo nomine, the decision making process had been influenced and without application of mind specifying certain vague reasons the Order of suspension had been made. In the backdrop of these facts, this ground of mala fides may have to be appreciated. It is pertinent to note that in none of the crimes/ cases referred to, the writ petitioner was the Investigating Officer. At the best he was a supervising officer being a higher authority. Apart from this aspect of the matter, the language employed in the Order impugned in the O.A. also would throw some doubt or suspicion that the impugned Order was made for certain extraneous reasons and not for the reasons as reflected on the face of the order. Apart from this aspect of the matter, on a careful scrutiny of the order, it is clear that even Rule 8 (1)(a) of the Rules also had not been complied with though some reference to the disciplinary proceedings had been just made. Definitely the same is not in compliance of the said rule.

16. Be that as it may, here is a case where a Police Officer is making a serious complaint of malice in action regarding Order of suspension. It is no doubt true that no specific mala fides had been alleged as against the 2nd respondent nor the 2nd respondent was impleaded eo nomine as a party. The impugned Order is preceded by a transfer Order which is being contended as an Order of surrender. Specific allegations had been made as against the 4th respondent and there is no specific denial by the 4th respondent, most probably in the light of the fact that the 3rd respondent did not make the impugned Order but only made the prior Order of transfer. When the specific stand is that the decision making process by the 2nd respondent had been influenced by the 3rd respondent and the 2nd respondent did not apply his mind but recorded certain reasons mechanically and made the impugned Order just to satisfy the 3rd respondent, it would be far more necessary on the part of the 4th respondent who had been impleaded eo nomine as a party to deny the allegations specifically but for reasons best known the same had not been done. Apart from this aspect of the matter, there should be some reasonable nexus between the reasons as recorded in the Order of suspension and should reflect the purpose for which the same had been thought of. Evidently, the said nexus is clearly absent in the present case.

17. Whether the Order impugned in the O.A. be sustained or be set aside:

The power of judicial review of Constitutional Courts cannot be limited by the technical objections unless the same would amount to manifest illegality. Constitutional Courts can touch and rectify any injustice in any corner amenable to their extraordinary powers and jurisdiction and no doubt they are to be exercised within bounds taking into consideration the facts and circumstances of a given case. Rendering substantial justice to be the general -principle and Constitutional Courts cannot impose on themselves any fetters in undoing manifest injustice in the decisions of this nature where balance may have to be maintained in this regard while enforcing public law remedies. Suffice to state that the Constitutional Courts are to act with due care and caution in safeguarding the rights of the affected parties. In the backdrop of the aforesaid principle, it may be further pertinent to refer to certain of the decisions cited in this regard when an Order of suspension may be resorted to. As already referred to supra, even Rule 8(1 )(a) of the Rules had not been complied with. No doubt, the learned Advocate General had pointed out to the portion of the Order where the words "....... until the conclusion of the disciplinary proceedings......" had been employed. But this cannot be said to be compliance of the aforesaid provision. Be that as it may, the beginning portion of Order reads as hereunder:
"Whereas it has come to the notice of the undersigned alleging that Sri P. Chandra Mouli, formerly ACP Banjara Hills, Hyderabad has exhibited grave misconduct, incorrigible, indifferent, indisciplined and irresponsible towards his legitimate duties and also he committed serious lapses in the matters relating to (1) Cr.No. 168/2004 Under Section 307 IPC, 25 (1), 27 Arms Act of Jubilee Hills Police Station; (2) Case Cr. No. 704/04 Under Sections 406, 420 IPC of Banjara Hills Police Station; (3) Case in Cr. No. 42/2005 Under Sections 427, 447 IPC of Banjara Hills P. S. and (4) Cr. No. 17/2005 Under Sections 147, 148, 427, 323 IPC of Jubilee Hills Police Station and his conduct in matters relating to civil disputes, property disputes or handling of certain issues had been questionable on more than one occasion. He has also failed to supervise several important Criminal cases in his Sub-Division."
The language employed and also repetition of the word or expression "public interest" and non-referring to any report on the basis of which the alleged impugned Order is said to have been made by the 2nd respondent and also the fact that on 17-1-2005 it was preceded by an Order made by the 3rd respondent would definitely lead to the irresistible inferential conclusion that the impugned Order had been made for certain extraneous reasons and not for the purpose or object for which the said Order is expected to be made in law. In the decision referred (1) supra, it was held at paras 7 and 9 as hereunder:

"The power of the State Government to place a Government servant under suspension is derived from Rule 10 of the Kerala Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1960. Under its provisions the appointing authority may at any time place a Government servant under suspension where a disciplinary proceeding against him is contemplated or is pending. Despite the apparent wide wording employed in the rule, it is now well settled that the object underlying the conferment of the said power is to enable the appointing authority to remove an officer to whom serious allegation of misconduct are imputed, from the sphere of his activity if: (a) the allegations against him are such that in the interests of the maintenance of the purity and probity of the administration or the upkeep of proper standards of discipline and morale in the service it will not be desirable to allow the officer to continue in service until he is cleared of the charges; or (b) where the position occupied by the officer is such that his continuance in service would render the conduct it investigation against him difficult or embarrassing. If the appointing authority after taking into account the facts and circumstances which are available before it, at that stage forms the opinion that the Government servant against whom serious imputations are made should not be allowed to function anywhere before the matter has been finally set at rest after holding a thorough enquiry, a suspension of the officer from service would be perfectly warranted. See The Government of India v. Tarak Nath Ghosh and Abdulsalam v. State of Kerala ILR 1972 (1) Kerala 296. It is, however, mandatory that before an officer can be validly placed under suspension under Rule 10, the authority passing the Order must address its mind to the relevant aspects and come to the bona fide conclusion that for either of the two reasons mentioned above or both the officer cannot be allowed to function in any post in the service until the enquiry against him is concluded.
.......
Although suspension is not one of the punishments narrated in Rule 11 of the Kerala Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, as Order of suspension is not to be lightly passed against a Government servant, for the reality cannot be ignored that an Order of suspension brings to bear on the Government servant consequences far more serious in nature than several of the penalties made mention of in Rule 11. It has a disastrous impact on the fair name and good reputation that may have been earned and built up by a Government servant in the course of many years of service. The damage suffered by the Government servant is largely irreversible because the denigration and disgrace visited on him by the Order of suspension is seldom wiped out by being subsequently exonerated from blame and reinstated in service. Hence it is imperative that the utmost caution and circumspection should be exercised in passing orders of suspension under Rule 10 resulting in such grave consequences to the Government servant concerned. It is also necessary to remember that the power of suspension is to be sparingly exercised and that is not meant to be used as a mode of giving expression to any displeasure felt by the appointing authority or the Government in respect of any act of commission or omission on the part of the officer."
In the decision referred (2) supra, a Division Bench of Kerala High Court while dealing with suspension no doubt under Rule 10 of the Kerala Civil Services Rules of 1960, observed:

"There is no controversy that Ext.P-1 Order of suspension was passed by the Government in exercise of the statutory power conferred under Rule 10 of the Kerala Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1960. This Rule states that the appointing authority may at any time place a Government servant under suspension where a disciplinary proceeding against him is contemplated. It is fairly settled that the executive has no absolute power in administrative matters. The Constitution enshrines and guarantees the Rule of law and Article 226 is designed to ensure that each and every authority in the Stage including the Government acts bona fide and within the limits of its power. The primary purpose of administrative law is the imposition of the checks on the powers of Government of its officers so that they may not either abuse their powers or go out of their legal bounds. Article 14 strikes at arbitrariness in State action and requires that the State action must be based on valid and relevant principles applicable alike to all similarly situated and it must not be guided on extraneous or irrelevant considerations because an action that is arbitrary must involve negation of equality. This position appears to be settled by the decisions of Supreme Court in Pratap Singh v. State of Punjab , E. P. Royappa v. State of Tamil Nadu , Menaka Gandhi v. Union of India , Ramanna v. I.A. Authority of India , Air India v. Nergesh Meera and D. S. Nakara v. Union of India .
It is the exigency of the conditions of service which requires to call for an Order of suspension and there can Administrative Service or the State service. The Government is entitled to place an officer under suspension even before definite charges have been communicated, after preliminary investigation has been made into the conduct of the officer concerned following allegations of corruption or malpractices levelled against him. Rule 10 empowers the appointing authority to place a member of the service under suspension when disciplinary action is under contemplation. This Rule read with Rule 15 makes it clear that disciplinary proceedings is contemplated only when the authority concerned is satisfied that there is prima facie case for taking action. It is on the basis of complaint received or on consideration of the report of investigation or for other reasons the authority is to satisfy that prima facie case exists. Therefore either there should be a complaint alleging misconduct or report of investigation or other material for exercising the power of suspension in contemplation of the disciplinary proceedings. As rightly pointed out by the learned Judge the only basis for the action against the 1st respondent in this case is the legal opinion furnished by the law officer on the particular award in one case and the inference there on drawn by the Secretary to Government. The facts and materials on the file when the impugned Order was passed are the only relevant considerations in judging the necessity of the suspension. The letter of the law officer did not contain imputation of improper motive or misconduct in the sense it is understood in disciplinary proceedings. No reference is made in the file regarding other awards passed by the respondent nor is there any allegation of corrupt practices. The inference of improper motive by the Secretary is a mere conjecture and even then the Secretary has only suggested the shifting of the respondent from the post of Chief Engineer (Arbitration) in the interest of the administration. The Chief Secretary however thought it fit to place the respondent under suspension as a deterrent step and to Order a vigilance enquiry. There can be no doubt that the proposed action was on extraneous considerations and not as a prelude to any contemplated disciplinary action after preliminary investigation into the conduct of the officer following allegations of corruption or of malpractice levelled against him. Since the only step taken by the Government was to Order vigilance investigation, in the absence of any serious allegations of misconduct or other materials for prima facie satisfaction of the authority, the power under Rule 10 could not have been exercised before receipt of the report of the investigation. It is not correct to say that the Chief Secretary while recommending the action of suspending the 1st respondent had taken into consideration the nature and number of awards passed by the respondent or the necessity or desirability of placing the respondent under suspension to facilitate an impartial enquiry. The qualitative and quantitative assessment of the work and conduct of the arbitrator with reference to the other awards appear to have been thought of only in the course of these proceedings before court. The only consideration that weighed with the Chief Secretary in proposing the suspension was that the action should be deterrent in administrative matters. As rightly pointed out by the learned Judge the stage has not reached for punishment and the proposed action was on extraneous consideration. The mala fides of the action lies in the absence of valid considerations. The learned Judge has rightly quashed the impugned Order of suspension with the reservations for future action, if found necessary.....".
In the decision referred (3) supra, while dealing with suspension in public employment and capricious exercise of such power under the West Bengal Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1971, it was held at para 7 as hereunder:

"After considering the respective contentions of the learned Counsel appearing for the parties, it appears to me that although an employer has an inherent power to place an employee under suspension but in a public employment such power cannot be exercised on mere liking of the employer or capriciously. It should be borne in mind that if an employee is kept under suspension, he will be entitled to get the subsistence allowance and without rendering any services such amount is payable to him. If without any cogent reason merely on the liking of the employer by exercising an inherent right an employee of Government or Public Undertaking is kept under suspension and by that process the suspension allowance goes to the employee, not only such action will be arbitrary thereby offending Article 14 of the Constitution but the same will also amount to a loss of public exchequer by not getting any service from the concerned Government employee without any just cause. That apart, in the instant case, when the Regulation 880 of Police Regulations, Bengal specifically deal with the question of suspension. In my view, the inherent power of suspension of an employee must be held to have been circumscribed by the provisions of Regulation 880 and no Order of suspension can be passed if the same does not justify an action of suspension as warranted under Regulation 880. In my view, it has been very rightly held by the Kerala High Court in the aforesaid decision (1973 (1) SLR 521) that suspension Order should not be lightly passed and it is mandatory for the authority to apply its mind and come to a bona fide conclusion that it was not desirable to keep the delinquent officer in service either in interest of purity and probity of administration or his continuing in service of the delinquent employee will render the investigation embarrassing. Mr. Justice Sabyasachi Mukherji (as His Lordship then was) in the other decision of the Calcutta High Court 1981 (1) CLJ 149 has also indicated that the suspension does not follow automatically whenever disciplinary proceeding is pending or contemplated against a delinquent employee. It also appears to me that Regulation 774 does not make the West Bengal Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1971 applicable to the Government employee. The attention of the Court could not have been drawn to any specific provision which applies to a subordinate police personnel in the West Bengal Police Force by which retrospective Order of suspension can be passed. Normally an Order of suspension must be deemed to be prospective because this is a positive action taken by the employer against the employee on consideration of the relevant facts. But in some cases under statutory provision an employee is some times deemed to have been placed under suspension and such provision of deemed suspension appears in the West Bengal Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules. But as the said Rule does not apply in terms to the petitioner, the question of placing him under suspension with retrospective effect is per se illegal and cannot be sustained. In my view, there is enough force in the submissions of the learned Counsel for the petitioner that the petitioner is a Sub-Inspector of Police attached to the Computer Cell at Burdwan and for the alleged offence of assaulting his friend's wife at Chinsurah, his presence in the Office at Burdwan does not appear to have caused any problem for causing an investigation by the local police in the district of Hooghly where the alleged incident of assault had taken place. It appears to me that the Superintendent of Police has not adverted to Regulation 880 and only mechanically passed the Order of suspension by placing the petitioner under suspension with retrospective effect without taking into consideration the relevant facts for which, in an appropriate case, the police officer can be placed under suspension."
18. The competency of the 2nd respondent to make the impugned Order of suspension is not in serious controversy. In the light of the specific stand taken by the writ petitioner and also on a careful scrutiny of the impugned Order made in the O.A. preceded by the Order of transfer, ordering surrender as the case may be by the 3rd respondent and non-denial of specific allegations of mala fides by the 4th respondent, the eo nomine party, would definitely establish that the action of making an Order of suspension is not bona fide and it was for certain extraneous reasons and hence the said Order tainted with inferential mala fides cannot be sustained and accordingly the same is hereby quashed.

19. To what relief: For the foregoing reasons recorded in detail, the Writ Petition is allowed. Costs quantified at Rs. 10,000/- to be paid by the Officer holding the office of the 2nd respondent at present and also the 4th respondent. The Order of payment of costs from the Officers concerned is being made keeping in view the facts and circumstances of the case.
================================================================================


================================================================================
CASE 20:
[Cites 49, Cited by 0]
Allahabad High Court
Syed Kamar Khusnoor @ Sheru vs State Of U.P. on 7 March, 2025
Bench: Saumitra Dayal Singh, Gautam Chowdhary




HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
 
 



 
Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:33889-DB
 
Court No. - 45
 

 
Case :- CRIMINAL APPEAL No. - 9480 of 2022
 
Appellant :- Syed Kamar Khusnoor @ Sheru
 
Respondent :- State of U.P.
 
Counsel for Appellant :- Alok Krishan Tripathi,Prashant Kumar Singh
 
Counsel for Respondent :- G.A.,Mukesh Kumar,Swati Agrawal Srivastava
 

 
and
 

 
Case :- CRIMINAL APPEAL No. - 1164 of 2022
 
Appellant :- Amrita Gupta @ Lucky Gupta @ Aliya
 
Respondent :- State of U.P.
 
Counsel for Appellant :- Pulak Ganguly,Shyama Charan Tripathi,Swati Agrawal Srivastava,Sr. Advocate
 
Counsel for Respondent :- Anup Kumar Pandey,Arvind Prabodh Dubey,G.A.
 

 
Hon'ble Saumitra Dayal Singh,J.
 
Hon'ble Dr. Gautam Chowdhary,J.

1. Heard Sri Prashant Kumar Singh, learned counsel for the appellant (in Criminal Appeal No.9480 of 2022), Sri V.P. Srivastava, learned Senior Counsel assisted by Sri Pulak Ganguli, learned counsel for the appellant (in Criminal Appeal No.1164 of 2022), Sri Manish Goyal, learned A.A.G. assisted by Sri J.K. Upadhyay, learned A.G.A.-I for the State, Sri Uday Karan Saxena, learned Senior Counsel assisted by Sri Manu Mishra and Sri Ashish Mani Tripathi, learned counsel for the informant and perused the record.

2.  The present appeal arises from the judgement and order dated 01.02.2022 passed by Mr. Satyanand Upadhyay, learned Additional Sessions Judge, Court No.1, Gorakhpur in Sessions Trial No.397 of 2015 (State of U.P. Vs. Syed Kamar Khusnoor @ Sheru), arising out of Case Crime No.331 of 2014, under Sections 302 & 120-B I.P.C., Police Station Kotwali, District Gorakhpur, Sessions Trial No.490 of 2015 (State of U.P. Vs. Amrita Gupta @ Lucky Gupta @ Aliya), arising out of Case Crime No.331 of 2014, under Section 120-B I.P.C., Police Station Kotwali, District Gorakhpur and Sessions Trial No.499 of 2015 (State of U.P. Vs. Syed Kamar Khusnoor @ Sheru), arising out of Case Crime No.332 of 2014, under Section 3/25 Arms Act, Police Station Kotwali, District Gorakhpur whereby the accused-appellant - Syed Kamar Khusnoor @ Sheru has been convicted under Section 302 I.P.C. and sentenced to undergo life imprisonment along with fine of Rs. 10,000/- and in default in payment of fine to further undergo additional rigorous imprisonment of six months; to undergo two year's rigorous imprisonment along with fine of Rs. 2,000/-, under Section 3/25 Arms Act and in default of payment to further undergo two months rigorous imprisonment; whereas the accused appellant-Amrita Gupta @ Lucky Gupta @ Aliya has been convicted under Section 302 read with Section 120-B I.P.C. and sentenced to undergo life imprisonment along with fine of Rs. 10,000/- and in default in payment of fine to further undergo additional rigorous imprisonment of six months. All sentences run concurrently.

3. At present, the appellant - Amrita Gupta @ Lucky Gupta @ Aliya is on bail, whereas the appellant - Syed Kamar Khusnoor @ Sheru has remained confined for more than ten years. He was not granted bail upon his arrest on 14.12.2014.

4. Earlier, the bail application had been pressed on behalf of the appellant-Syed Kamar Khusnoor @ Sheru. Upon elaborate objection being offered by the State to that bail application, that would have consumed much time, it was considered judiciously expedient to hear the appeal itself, on merits. Accordingly, hearing of these appeals was prioritized. The appeals have been thus heard on merits.

5. The prosecution story emerged on what is now admitted to be photocopy of a Written Report described to be dated 13.12.2014. That photocopy of a document is Ex. Ka-2. On such intimation received by the police authorities, the FIR was registered at Police Station Kotwali, District Gorakhpur being Case Crime No.253 of 2014 dated 13.12.2014, at about 4.40 p.m. That FIR is Ex. Ka-1.

6. According to that FIR narration, at about 4:00 p.m. on 13.12.2014, the deceased Kavita Gupta was standing at Kamla Hospital located in Mohalla - Miyan Bazaar, Police Station - Kotwali, District - Gorakhpur alongwith Yash Kumar Gupta-her son/first informant (P.W.-2 at the trial). At that time, Syed Qamar Khushnoor (hereinafter referred to as the 'assailant') who bore old animus arising from property disputes between the parties, shot at the deceased who fell to the ground and died in a while. The FIR also narrates that the other appellant Amrita Gupta (hereinafter referred to as the 'conspirator') was complicit in the occurrence. Thereafter, the FIR narrates, many persons were present at that time, at D.K. Tower. They had seen the occurrence but the assailant escaped. That FIR was recorded by the Head Constable Heera Lal (P.W.-1 at the trial).

7. A 'Panchayatnama' was drawn between 16:40 and 17:23 hours on 13.12.2014. In that, the'panch' witness Rajesh Kumar Gupta (P.W.-3) at the trial, Sri Suresh Kumar Gupta, Sri Akshay Kumar Gupta (P.W.-4) at the trial, Sri Avinash Singh and Sri Anupam Kumar Gupta, were named.

8. On 13.12.2014 five recoveries were made. First, recovery of blood stained and plain tiles was made by Sri Sunil Kumar Rai (P.W.-7 at the trial) at the trial. That Recovery Memo (Ex. Ka-4) records, such recovery was made from inside the ultrasound room inside the building D.K. Tower, from below a bench in that room. Another recovery was made on that date by P.W.-7, of blood stained and plain Raxin on the bench placed inside that ultrasound room. Though the exact description of the place from which that recovery was made is not recorded in that Recovery Memo, that fact asserted by the prosecution is undisputed. The said Recovery Memo is Ex. Ka-5. A third recovery was made on 13.12.2014-of an empty of a cartridge of a 12 bore ammunition, with marking KF Special-12, written on its base. That was recovered from the gallery outside the ultrasound room of Lifeline Diagnostic Center (described as the place of occurrence). That Recovery Memo is Ex. Ka-6. The fourth recovery was made on 13.12.2014 by P.W.-7, of empty of a bullet cartridge of 32 bore with marking KF-7.65 at his base. This recovery is described to have been made from the place of occurrence, inside the room of Lifeline Diagnostic Center. That Recovery Memo is Ex. Ka-7. Also, a pair of slippers worn by the deceased was recovered. That recovery is described to have been made from the place of occurrence. That Recovery Memo is Ex. Ka-8.

9. On 14.12.2014, the assailant was arrested. It is further disclosed that at his pointing out, one country made pistol was recovered from under a covered bucket, kept inside a generator canopy, placed in front of the building, D.K. Tower. That recovery memo is Ex. Ka-13 at the trial. It contains disclosure statements in Part I and Part II. However, there is no independent witness. Upon recovery of such firearm, another FIR was registered against the assailant, in Case Crime No. 254 of 2014, under Sections 3/25 of the Arms Act, 1959. That FIR is Ex. Ka-19 at the trial.

10. The autopsy on the dead body of the deceased, was performed on 14.12.2014 by Dr. Sant Lal Kannaujiya i.e. P.W.-5 at the trial. The autopsy was performed between 2:30 to 3:00 a.m., on 14.12.2014. In that, the following firearm injuries were noticed :

"(i) Firearm injuries entry wound of size 5 x 3 cm upper part of neck and below left ear lobula. Wound is blackened inverted margin. Brain deep with mandible (bone). Vissels lacerated. Trachea (bone) and assaulted asophagus recovered from brain base.
(ii) 39 metallic pallets and 1 plastic carbaveding present with clotted blood present.
(iii) Firearm injury entry wound present on abdomen left lateral part of size 1 x 1 cm wound is blackened (15 cm) away from umblicious circular shaped. Inverted margin on cutting muscles downward through and through, 8 cm below injuries no.2. Medially below. External wound of size 1.5 x 1.5 cm present anterior crest, margin everted, entry to exit prob through and through passing."
11. Thirty-nine pellets with pieces of plastic wad described as 'carbavending', were recovered from the body of the deceased. The issue of time of death is not a disputed fact in the present facts. The autopsy report is Ex. Ka-9.

12. As to the ballistic report, though it is undisputed that the recovered firearm, the pellets and two empties were sent for ballistic test at FSL, Lucknow, the report submitted by the FSL Lucknow is not relied by the prosecution. To the extent, the defence relies on the same and further to the extent such report is of a government agency, the same is part of the record and has been made part of the Supplementary Paperbook. Such report is dated 19.03.2014. It suggests that the two empties recovered, may not be referable to the firearm recovered.

13. Suffice to note, barring Sri Rajesh Kumar Gupta (P.W.-3 at the trial) and Sri Achchelal Gupta (P.W.-4 at the trial), the other 'panch' witness including Sri Suresh Kumar Gupta (brother of P.W.-3 and brother-in-law of the deceased), were not examined at the trial. The Investigating Officer Sri Sunil Kumar Rai (P.W.-7) conducted and completed the investigation. He submitted a Charge-Sheet arising from the first FIR dated 13.12.2014 on 06.02.2015. It is Ex. Ka-26 at the trial. The other investigation arising from the offence alleged under Sections 3/25 of the Arms Act, 1959, was investigated by the Investigating Officer Bhawani Bheekh Rajbhar. (P.W.-11 at the trial). He submitted the (second) charge sheet on 09.03.2015. It is Ex. Ka-16 at the trial.

14. In such circumstances, the learned court below framed the following charges against the assailant and the conspirator :

Against the conspirator "प्रथम- यह कि दिनांक 13.12.2014 को समय लगभग 4.00 बजे शाम वहद स्थान मुहल्ला डी.के. टावर कमला हास्पिटल मुहल्ला मियाँ बाजार, थाना कोतवाली, जिला गोरखपुर में आपने वादी मुकदमा यश कुमार गुप्ता की माता कविता गुप्ता की हत्या कारित करने का आपराधिक षड़यंत्र किया। इस प्रकार आपने भा०दं०सं० की धारा-120बी के अन्तर्गत दण्डनीय अपराध कारित किया, जो कि इस न्यायालय के प्रसंज्ञान में है।"
Against the assailant "प्रथम- यह कि दिनांक 13.12.2014 को समय लगभग 4.00 बजे शाम वहद स्थान मुहल्ला डी.के. टावर कमला हास्पिटल मुहल्ला मियाँ बाजार, थाना कोतवाली, जिला गोरखपुर में आपने वादी मुकदमा यश कुमार गुप्ता की माता कविता गुप्ता की असलहे से गोली मार कर मृत्यु कारित कर दी। इस प्रकार आपने भा०दं०सं० की धारा-302 के अन्तर्गत दण्डनीय अपराध कारित किया जो कि इस न्यायालय के प्रसंज्ञान में है।
द्वितीय- यह कि उपरोक्त दिनांक, समय व स्थान पर आपने अन्य सह अभियुक्त अमृता गुप्ता उर्फ लकी उर्फ आलिया के साथ मिलकर वादी मुकदमा यश कुमार गुप्ता की माता कविता गुप्ता की हत्या कारित करने का आपराधिक षड़यंत्र किया। इस प्रकार आपने भा०दं०सं० की धारा-120बी के अन्तर्गत दण्डनीय अपराध कारित किया, जो कि इस न्यायालय के प्रसंज्ञान में है।
यह कि दिनांक 14.12.2014 को समय 16.45 बजे वहद स्थान डी०के० टावर के सामने मियाँ बाजार, थाना कोतवाली, जिला गोरखपुर में आपके बताने पर एस.एच.ओ. सुनील कुमार राय व उनके हमराहियान आपके कब्जे से एक अदद तमन्चा 12 बोर नाजायज बरामद हुआ, जिसको रखने का आपके पास कोई अधिकार-पत्र नहीं था। इस प्रकार आपने धारा-3/25 आयुध अधिनियम के अन्तर्गत दण्डनीय अपराध कारित किया, जो कि इस न्यायालय के प्रसंज्ञान में है।"
15. Besides the above documentary evidence, at the trial, the prosecution sought to prove its story on the strength of oral evidence of 11 witness namely: -

(i) Heera Lal (Head Constable) who recorded the Fire Information Report as P.W.-1;
(ii) Yash Kumar Gupta (son of the deceased), the first informant who claimed to have seen the occurrence in entirety, as P.W.-2;
(iii) Rajesh Kumar Gupta (brother-in-law/'devar' of the deceased) who reached the place of occurrence soon thereafter and who sought to establish motive to the assailants and the conspirator, as P.W.-3;
(iv) Achchelal Gupta who was a witness to the inquest, as P.W.-4;
(v) Dr. Sant Lal Kannaujiya who conducted the autopsy, as P.W.-5.
(vi) Constable Ravi Shanker Gupta who proved the earlier F.I.R. lodged by the deceased against the assailant alleging offence under Section 376, 307, 452, 323, 504, 506, 147 & 148 I.P.C in Case Crime No. 143 of 2014, P.S. Kotwali, examined, as P.W.-6;
(vii) S.H.O. Sunil Kumar Rai, the Investigating Officer, in Case Crime No. 253 of 204 containing allegation of offence under Section 302 I.P.C. read with Section 120B I.P.C., as P.W.-7;
(viii) Constable Uma Shankar Upadhyay who proved the registration of the F.I.R. in Case Crime No. 332 of 2014, for the offence alleged under Section 3/25 Arms Act, as P.W.-8;
(ix) Head Constable Dev Bhaskar Tiwari, to whom the dead body had been entrusted for autopsy, as P.W.-9;
(x) S.I. Sheikh Bahadur Singh who conducted the inquest on the body of the deceased, as P.W.-10 and;
(xi) Shri Bhawani Rajbhar, the Investigating Officer in the other case arising for the offence under Section 3/25 Arms Act, as P.W.-11.
16. Thereafter, the statements of the assailant and the conspirator i.e. the accused persons, were recorded under Section 313 Cr.P.C. Further, by way of defence evidence, Shri Mahesh Chandra Srivastava, Advocate, who is described to be the scribe who prepared the Written Report dated 13.12.2012 (Ex. Ka-2) was produced as D.W.-1.

17. Thereafter, the learned court below has upon hearing and upon appraisal of evidence and submissions advanced reached a conclusion that the assailant had in fact shot dead the deceased inside the ultrasound room, at the place described as Lifeline Diagnostic Centre, Kamla Hospital, located inside the building described as D.K. Tower and that he fled from that place. It has also found that the conspirator was present at the relevant place and uttered words to the effect that disclosed her complicity in the murder of the deceased. It has also held the assailant guilty under Section 3/25 Arms Act. Upon such conviction, the appellants have been sentenced as noted above.

18. By way of oral evidence, P.W.-1 deposed that he had recorded the 'chik' F.I.R. It is Ex. Ka-1. He also claimed that the Written Report (Ex. Ka-2) recorded was an original document. He denied the suggestion that the same was a photocopied document. As a fact, learned Additional Advocate General concedes that the document Ex. Ka.-2 is a photocopied document. However, it is his submission that would have no material bearing on the prosecution case itself inasmuch as it is not mandatory that the F.I.R. be registered only against an original Written Report. Yash Kumar Gupta, the son of the deceased (P.W.-2) and younger brother of the conspirator who was aged about 14 years on the date of occurrence, first stated that conspirator had married the assailant against the wishes of her family. He then stated that at the time of the occurrence, the assailant and the conspirator used to live in a house situated at the first floor of the building D.K. Tower. According to him, on 13.04.2012, at about 4.00 PM, the deceased and the witness were present at Lifeline Diagnostic Centre, located adjacent to Kamla Hospital, inside the building D.K. Tower. At that time, two ladies were also present inside that room. One was applying 'mehndi' to the hands of the deceased. At that juncture, the assailant entered that room and shot at the deceased with a country made pistol. On being thus shot, the deceased fell over on a table. Thereafter, the assailant fired multiple/repeated shots at the deceased, in quick succession. To that, the deceased succumbed. The conspirator is disclosed to have reached the place of occurrence at that time and uttered words to the effect that their work was accomplished. Both, the assailant and the conspirator fled, the assailant with the country made pistol ascribed to him. According to the said witness, in the commotion that arose, no one helped. The employees of the Ultrasound Centre, fled for their own safety. Shopkeepers downed the shutters.

19. Thereafter, the said witness narrated that the assailant and the witness were involved in property disputes. Cases were pending between them. The assailant is described to be a person who wanted to grab the properties of the witness (P.W.-2). He also narrated that prior to this occurrence, the assailant had committed rape on his mother. With respect to that, a statement of the deceased was recorded under Section 164 Cr.P.C.

20. However, of his own, P.W.-2 added that the assailant did not say anything to him, at the time of the occurrence. He tried to prove the Written Report (Ex. Ka-2). In that, he stated he had signed such Written Report. However, he maintained, it was written by Shri Mahesh Chandra Srivastava (D.W.-1).

21. Last, he stated that the assailant and conspirator were trying to get mutated, the property of P.W.-2, in their names.

22. Early in his cross-examination, he claimed that the Written Report had been written by Shri Mahesh Chandra Srivastava (D.W.-1), a civil lawyer. Later, he stated that the original Written Report was got photocopied and that photocopy was submitted to the police. As to when his other uncle Shri Suresh Chandra Gupta reached the place of occurrence, he claimed that the latter reached about half an hour later. However, it is true that the said Suresh Chandra Gupta was not examined at the trial. Further, he claimed that his uncle namely Rakesh Chandra Gupta (P.W.-3) reached first. He also claimed that his uncle and Mahesh Chandra Srivastava (D.W.-1) reached the place of occurrence, together. Then, he answered in the affirmative that there pre-existed civil disputes between P.W.-3 and his father late Durgesh Kumar Gupta. He specifically admitted that his father Durgesh Kumar Gupta had instituted O.S. No. 811 of 2008 against his uncle Rakesh Chandra Gupta, on 19.12.2008. He further admitted that after the death of his father, the names of the conspirator and the said witness had been substituted - as plaintiffs, in that suit. He also admitted to proceedings in O.S No. 1131 of 2014, Rakesh Chandra Gupta vs Kavita Gupta i.e. the deceased, with respect to the property at Mia Bazar wherein the said Rakesh Chandra Gupta claimed 576.30 acres of land.

23. As to his own life and status, on 15.11.2017, he disclosed that at that time, a home tutor used to visit and take tution classes at his residence. That tuition class lasted from 4 P.M. to 5 P.M.. As to his school activity, he disclosed, he used to leave for school at 7 A.M. and return after school gave over at 2 P.M.. He also disclosed that he used to stay at home after school, to complete his studies, etc.

24. As to the jewellery of the deceased, the said witness disclosed that the same were lying with his uncle Rakesh Chandra Gupta (P.W.-3), since the death of his mother.

25. Coming to the place of occurrence and his presence, during his cross-examination conducted on 6.4.2018, he described that the building D.K. Tower as a three storied building and that Kamla Hospital was located at the second floor of the building. Then, he further stated that he did not use to visit D. K. Tower and therefore was not aware of the particular rooms in that building.

26. That exact detail apart, on further query, he stated, he was not aware of what existed on the lower floor of D. K. Tower. As to the reason for his ignorance, he suggested that he did not know the details because he did not frequent D. K. Tower. He also feigned ignorance of the entry point of D. K. Tower, from the main road.

27. Further, he elaborated that he had not seen anybody visit Kamla Hospital. He also could not recollect if there were any partitions, inside Lifeline Diagnostic Centre, where the occurrence took place.

28. He also could not recollect the nature of goods dealt with at the shops inside the building of D. K. Tower nor he could give any description of the shop keepers of such shops, though he recalled, there were approximately 22-23 shops in that building. Yet, he could not recollect if there was anybody present at those shops at the time of occurrence. He maintained, there were two ladies present at the time of occurrence and that 'mehndi' was being applied to the deceased, at that time.

29. As to the time when he left for Kamla Hospital, he could not recollect but he did assert that he left for Lifeline Diagnostic Centre with his mother, directly from his home.

30. As to the activities of the deceased and his own, the witness disclosed that his mother had partnership in many activities and that she was a political leader as well. He also disclosed that she used to run a restaurant by the name - 'Mirch Masala'. As to the accounts of such business, he disclosed that the same was earlier maintained by his mother, and now by him.

31. On being confronted that the place described in the Written Report/FIR is different from that being now narrated, he stated that the description that the deceased and the witness were standing at Kamla Hospital was wrong, but that his Written Report was true.

32. As to other occurrences, on question being put as to the details of litigation evidenced between the deceased and with the assailant and the conspirator, he stated that he could not recall. He also could not disclose the property for which such litigation had arisen. However, he maintained that his mother had instituted such cases.

33. He denied a suggestion thrown at him that he was under pressure to give his statement in that manner, at the instance of Rajesh Kumar Gupta (P.W.-3).

34. Next, Sri Rajesh Kumar Gupta (P.W.-3) was examined. He disclosed that the husband of the deceased namely (Late) Durgesh Kumar Gupta, Suresh Kumar Gupta and himself, were three brothers. He disclosed that the building D. K. Tower was owned by his brother (Late) Durgesh Kumar Gupta. He also disclosed that the Kamla Hospital was situated on the upper floor of the said building. According to him, the deceased was worried about the assailant and the conspirator grabbing her properties. He further claimed that the assailants and the conspirators used to collect rent of the shops etc. located in the building D. K. Tower. As to the occurrence, he disclosed, on 13.12.2014 at about 4:00 P.M., he was present at his shop on Revti Road about 50 to 60 paces from Kamla Hospital. He learnt of the gunfire. That led a commotion. He then moved towards Kamla Hospital on foot. At that time, he claims to have seen the assailant flee, looking nervous.

35. Upon reaching Kamla Hospital, he found the deceased lying dead and her son Yash Kumar Gupta (P.W.-2) crying that the assailant had shot at the deceased and that his sister was also present, at that time. He also claimed that P.W.-2 told him, at that time itself that the conspirator was talking to the assailant and saying words to the effect that he had done the right thing, by killing the old lady. Thereafter, the said witness claimed, inquest was performed in his presence and that recoveries of blood-stained tile etc., were made by the Police, in his presence. To that, there may exist no doubt.

36. He further stated that one empty cartridge was found and recovered outside the ultrasound room where the occurrence took place. He also stated that in his presence, the Investigating Officer recovered the empty of a pistol from inside the room at Life Line Diagnostic Centre, where the occurrence took place.

37. He further stated, Acche Lal (P.W.-4) had also seen the assailant flee after the occurrence.

38. During his cross-examination, he further admitted, on 25.07.2006 he had instituted Original Suit No.397 of 2006 against his deceased brother (Late) Durgesh Kumar Gupta and the deceased Kavita Gupta, to restrain those defendants from transferring the suit properties described as 1700 ft. land near Arogya Temple Basaratpur, agriculture land 32 decimal, 30 decimal, 60 decimal, 3597 sq. ft. at village Harsevakpur, 21 decimal in village Gulhariya, 40 decimal at Mirzapur, 5 decimal at Jangal Chatrachadhari, 74 area in Siswa, 83 area and 219 area in village Senga, 19 decimal, 167 decimal and 24.5 decimal in village Umarpur, 7.25 decimal in Sahara Estate and other properties. He admitted existence of long litigation pending between him and his brother (Late) Durgesh Kumar Gupta. He stated though properties had been purchased in the name of his elder brother (Late) Durgesh Kumar Gupta, but other family members had shares in that.

39. On specific cross-examination, he admitted that in paragraph 13 of the pleadings made in the above described suit, he has specifically stated that the conspirator had managed to sell the property in Semra and that in paragraph 14 he had further stated that the conspirator was involved with anti-social elements and was threatening to sell the suit properties. He also admitted, upon parties not pursuing the suit proceeding the same came to be dismissed for want of prosecution. He also admitted land had been purchased by him along with his elder brother (Late) Durgesh Kumar Gupta on which at present he was running the shop in the name of R.K. Electricals.

40. During his further cross-examination, the said witness also admitted that during his life time, (Late) Durgesh Kumar Gupta had instituted Original Suit No.811 of 2008 against the said witness. After the death of that plaintiff, the deceased along with his daughter i.e. the conspirator and her son Yash Kumar Gupta (P.W.-2) were impleaded as plaintiffs. He admitted that in such proceedings he had pleaded that the deceased along with the conspirator and the assailant were trying to sell the suit properties.

41. He also admitted that the House No.173 belonged to his mother. At present, that property has been mutated in his name to the exclusion of his late brother Durgesh Kumar Gupta and his other brother Suresh Kumar Gupta.

42. Though, he first attempted to deny any litigation between him and the deceased, but at the same time during his cross-examination he admitted that prior to the death of the deceased he had instituted Original Suit No.1131 of 2014 against the deceased. He tried to avoid the answer by saying he could not recollect any fact with respect to such suit proceedings. He also could not recall that after the death of the deceased, the said suit proceedings came to be dismissed for want of prosecution. He again admitted that the deceased had filed a substitution application in Original Suit No.811 of 2008 to substitute the conspirator and her son Yash Kumar Gupta (P.W.-2) as legal representatives of the (late) Durgesh Kumar Gupta.

43. As to criminal case being Case Crime No. 851 of 2009 lodged against the said witness under Section 419, 420, 467, 468 and 471 I.P.C., he stated that case though disclosed to have been instituted by the deceased brother Durgesh Kumar Gupta i.e. husband of the deceased and the father of the conspirator, it was not lodged by his brother but by someone else. He also tried to claim ignorance that any charge has been framed against him with respect to the fabricated entry dated 20.11.2008, in the records of the Nagar Nigam, Gorakhpur - against Charge-sheet No.851 of 2009 on which cognizance was taken by the C.J.M., Gorakhpur or that any interim order had been obtained by him from the High Court in those proceedings. Specific doubt was expressed by the defence that the said witness was making deposition against the assailant and the conspirator in greed of the properties of his deceased brother, the deceased, the conspirator and her brother (P.W.-2).

44. Then, he was confronted with the registration of a Criminal Case No. 4989 of 2011 by the assailant against the said witness under Section 138 N.I. Act, making allegation of dishonour of cheque for shortage of funds. He admitted that that case had been instituted on an allegation of dishonour of cheque for Rs.32 lacs. Yet, he tried to explain the same by stating that he had never issued such cheque and the signature thereon was forged. He also claimed ignorance of another criminal case lodged by the assailant under Section 500 I.P.C. against the said witness, pending in the Court of Judicial Magistrate-III. In that case, deceased had recorded her statement under Section 202 Cr.P.C., in favour of the assailant and against P.W.-3.

45. Coming back to the occurrence, during his further cross-examination, he now described that the occurrence took place in the vacant ultrasound room and there was no employee present, at that time. He further submitted that he was told by P.W.-2 that at the time of occurrence, two ladies were applying 'Mehndi' to her.

46. He further claimed, he knew that the assailant had shot the deceased and therefore, he was fleeing from the place of occurrence, nervously. As to time when he reached the place of occurrence, he heard about the occurrence after about 2/3 minutes when unnamed persons informed him that his sister-in-law had been shot dead. He claimed to have been told of such occurrence (by unknown persons), with reference to his relationship to the deceased. He claimed that he did not remember who told him about the same. Having heard such occurrence, he went to the place of occurrence and reached there in a very short span of time.

47. As to the structure, D. K. Tower, he described the same in detail with number of rooms etc. Yet, he is not an eye-witness of the occurrence.

48. Next, Acche Lal Gupta (P.W.-4) was examined. During his cross-examination, he stated that he had not seen the occurrence but heard that the assailant had shot the deceased and fled from the spot. He also claimed that P.W.-2 had also informed him about the occurrence. He also admitted that his statement was recorded by the I.O., after the assailants had been arrested.

49. Next, Dr. Sant Lal Kanaujiya was examined as P.W.-5. He clearly proved, two fire-arm injuries were received by the deceased. The seat of the first injury was in her neck region-below her left ear lobe. There was blackness at the entry wound and its margins were inverted. That injury was brain deep. The mandible bone was fractured. The arteries of brain were lacerated. The trachea and the esophagus were also fractured. 39 metallic pellets and pieces of plastic wad were recovered from that injury wound. Clots of blood were also noticed. With respect to the second injury, the same was noted to have been suffered by the deceased, in the abdominal region, about 1 cm x 2 cm with blackness. The seat of that injury was 15 cm below the navel with inverted margins. The injury went through and through, with the exit wound 1.5 cm x 1.5 cm, with ovulate margins.

50. Next, Constable Ravi Shanker was examined as P.W.-6. He proved the lodging of the earlier FIR by the deceased against the assailant and her statement recorded under Section 164 Cr.P.C., in that proceedings.

51. Thereafter, Sunil Kumar Rai, the Investigating Officer was examined as P.W.-7. He proved the investigation.

52. In such evidence Sri Prashant Kumar Singh, learned counsel for the appellants submits that the prosecution story is a bundle of lies, besides being self contradicted and not proven. Undeniably, the conspirator (as described) is the daughter and one of the two children born to the deceased. She was already married to the assailant on the date of the occurrence. The motive for the occurrence is described to be property disputes between the deceased and her son (P.W.-2) on one side with the assailant and the conspirator i.e. the accused persons on the other. At the same time, it is duly proven at the trial that there existed other property disputes between the deceased and her brother-in-law ('devar'). In those disputes, the assailant and the conspirator remained on the side of the deceased. There is a third nature of dispute that existed between the assailant and the brother-in-law ('devar') of the deceased, namely P.W.-3, wherein allegations emerged against the said P.W.-3, at the instance of the appellants. Relying on the principle that motive is a double edged weapon, here, it has been submitted, clearly there existed motive with Sri Rajesh Kumar Gupta (P.W.-3) to make false accusation against the appellants as would ever disentitle the conspirator of her share in the estate of the deceased and her father, (Lste) Durgesh Kumar Gupta. The son of the deceased namely Yash Kumar Gupta (P.W.-2) was only 14 years of age on the date of occurrence. In view of the unfair advantage of the occurrence taken by P.W.-3, P.W.-2, he stood completely exposed and vulnerable, on the murder of the deceased. By making false accusation against the assailant and the conspirator who were already involved in multiple litigations with P.W.-3, deliberate attempt has been made by P.W.-3 to take advantage of the occurrence, in such other proceedings, by isolating Yash Kumar Gupta (P.W.-2) from his sister, the alleged conspirator and by thus making him dependent on P.W.-3.

53. The occurrence was caused wholly otherwise. Yash Kumar Gupta (P.W.-2) being young and tender in age and also in view of some litigation pre-existing involving the appellants on one side and the deceased on the other, the entire prosecution story was orchestrated and trumpeted by Rajesh Kumar Gupta (P.W.-3), making false accusation against the appellants only to isolate Yash Kumar Gupta (P.W.-2), who was otherwise vulnerable, being under age. The evidence of advantage taken by Rajesh Kumar Gupta (P.W.-3) exists upon admission made by Yash Kumar Gupta (P.W.-2) that after the death of the deceased, the jewellery of the deceased had been taken away by Rajesh Kumar Gupta (P.W.-3). Thus, it has been submitted, motive of false accusation made (by P.W.-3) in the prosecution story, is stronger than that proven against the appellants.

54. On the other hand, the motive attributed to the appellants is non-existant and in any case wholly doubtful-in face of pre-existing civil and other litigation not witnessed by any threat ever held out to the deceased and/or P.W.-2 and it not preceded by any occurrence of any type as may have escalated into the present occurrence.

55. Here, during his examination-in-chief, the said witness clearly stated that the appellant and the conspirator did not say a word to him and did not seek to harm him in any way even though he had seen the occurrence and therefore they would have known that he would testify against them as may result in conviction and therefore ineligibility to succeed to the estate of the deceased and (Late) Durgesh Kumar Gupta. Next, it has been emphasised that the appellants have no criminal history. The only case reported against the appellants is of false accusation of rape made by the deceased against the assailant for reason of other civil disputes between the parties.

56. As to facts, it has been submitted, according to the prosecution story to the extent it is wholly consistent, the occurrence took place inside the ultrasound room of Lifeline Diagnostic Center, depicted on the first floor of the building D. K. Tower in front of Kailash Hospital-the two facilities being separated by a gallery. The solitary eye-witness namely P.W.-2 described having seen the occurrence while standing outside that room in that gallery. He described in the FIR that he saw the assailant shoot at the deceased. Though the FIR is not an encyclopedia as to any occurrence, at the trial he described that the assailant shot at the deceased with a country made pistol. The deceased fell over. Thereafter, the appellant fired many rounds in quick succession. Thereafter, the assailant fled from the spot with that country made weapon.

57. Yet, it is undeniable, only two empties were recovered from the place of occurrence. The first was an empty of a 12 bore/caliber cartridge, recovered from the gallery-outside the ultrasound room and the second was an empty of 32 bore firearm, recovered from inside the ultrasound room. It is admitted to the prosecution that the two empties thus recovered relate to the firearm injuries suffered by the deceased. While one empty recovered outside the ultrasound room is of 12 bore clearly referable to the injuries suffered in the neck region of the deceased, with respect to which 39 pellets and pieces of plastic wad ('carbaveding'), were recovered from inside the dead body of the deceased, the other is a bullet injury of 32 bore, with respect to which recovery was made from inside the ultrasound room.

58. That injury is through and through in the abdominal region of the deceased. In absence of any other recovery proven and in absence of any other firearm injury suffered by the deceased, it has been strenuously urged, there is no case made out of multiple shots, fired in quick succession.

59. Second, it has been submitted, undeniably, two weapons have been used in the assault, one of 12 bore and the other 32 bore. Recovery of pellets from one injury and the through and through other injury, clearly indicate that the first was caused by a 12 bore firearm, which may include a country made firearm and the other with a pistol or revolver (of whatever description), that caused a bullet injury. The said weapon of assault has not been described in the entire prosecution story. Since both injuries could not be caused by one weapon, the prosecution story is false, to begin with.

60. Third, it has been submitted, it is not the case of the prosecution that the assailant used two weapons. Yash Kumar Gupta (P.W.-2) only stated that the assailant used one country made firearm to shoot at the deceased and thereafter to fire multiple shots, in quick succession. He never described any other weapon held by the assailant. For that reason, the prosecution story is false.

61. Fourth, it has been submitted, Yash Kumar Gupta (P.W.-2), the solitary eye-witness further stated that he saw the appellant flee with a country made fire-arm. Thus, no description whatsoever exists of how the deceased came to suffer two different nature of firearm injuries, with a single firearm described by the prosecution.

62. Fifth, it has been asserted, there is no evidence of multiple shots fired in quick succession inasmuch other than two emptees referable to the two injuries suffered by the deceased, that part of the prosecution story is completely false.

63. Next, it has been submitted, the ballistic report on record disproves the recovery of firearm-described to have been recovered at the pointing out by the assailant. Existence of the ballistic report is not denied to the prosecution. It has been prepared by the Forensic Science Laboratory, Lucknow. It clearly contradicts the prosecution story of recovery of that firearm. In any case, that recovery claimed is only of a country made pistol but not of the revolver or the pistol or other weapon as may have caused the second injury in the abdominal region of the deceased. For that flaw in the prosecution narration (to prove that injury beyond reasonable doubt), the prosecution story must fail. Here, it has been emphasized, blackening around the entry wound and through & through nature of the second injury suggest, both injuries were caused to the deceased from close quarters.

64. Further, it is the prosecution story that the deceased was present at the place of occurrence with two other ladies, one of whom was applying 'Mehndi' to her. Neither of the two ladies was named in the F.I.R. nor any evidence arose at their instance. Even the story of 'Mehndi' being applied to the deceased at the time of occurrence, has been doubted from the 'Panchayatnama' and the autopsy report inasmuch as there is absolutely no description of such fact noted in those documents. The prosecution story has also been doubted on the strength of the alleged discrepancy in the F.I.R. narration and the statement of P.W.-2 as to the place of occurrence-from Kamla Hospital to Lifeline Diagnostic Centre. That transition in the prosecution story was made from the F.I.R. narration, to the evidence led at the trial.

65. Thus, the entire prosecution story is described to be unreliable and false. It has emerged at the hands of Rakesh Chandra Gupta (P.W.-3) who is also the paternal uncle of the conspirator with whom the deceased was involved in several civil litigation (involving ancestral properties inherited by the said witness along with his two brothers, one of them being the (late) father of the conspirator) with that witness. Also, the said Rakesh Chandra Gupta (P.W.-3) was involved in litigation with the alleged assailant. For that reason, he propounded and supported the false prosecution story that the occurrence was caused by the appellants. By doing that, he has isolated the first informant (P.W.-2)/minor brother of the conspirator who was 14 years of age on the date of occurrence and who admitted that the jwellery of the deceased/his mother has been taken away by the said witness (P.W.-3), after the death of the deceased.

66. Shri V.P. Srivastava, Senior Advocate, assisted by Shri Pulak Ganguly, learned counsel for the conspirator has laid emphasis on the fact that there were two weapons used to cause the occurrence. The prosecution story with respect to the second weapon is completely and unacceptably silent. Not only the prosecution has failed to explain but it has chosen not mention that two weapons were used, to cause the occurrence. That defeats the prosecution case. Second, it has been submitted, a photocopy of the Written Report may never be entertained. More substantially, it has been submitted, in any case, according to the prosecution story, the original Written Report was written by Shri Mahesh Chandra Srivastava (D.W.-1) yet, the prosecution failed to the examine him as a prosecution witness - a practicing lawyer at Gorakhpur. He appeared in court as a defence witness and clearly stated that he had not written any report of which photocopy may exist, by way of Ex. Ka.-2. He further stated that he is suffering from Parkinson's disease and was therefore unable to write any matter with his hand. No doubt emerged during his cross-examination. His hand-writing was not tested. Therefore, the prosecution story that the prompt F.I.R. was lodged by P.W.-2, written by Shri Mahesh Chandra Srivastava, is entirely false.

67. As to the injuries suffered by the deceased, it has been emphasized, they leave no doubt that two firearm injuries were caused by two different weapons - one a 12 bore firearm, possibly a country made weapon from which a cartridge based projectile was fired. That injury was caused from a close range as allowed for blackening and pieces of wad getting lodged inside the body of the deceased, along with 39 metallic pellets. The other injury did not result in recovery of any metallic pellets rather, in that was caused by a bullet that passed through and through the abdominal region of the deceased. That injury was caused by a bullet based projectile and not a cartridge. Looking at the size of the injury, it may have been caused by a 32 bore firearm that too from close range. Recovery of two different empties corroborate that nature of the occurrence and injuries as noted above.

68. As to conspiracy, it has been submitted, no evidence exists in support of any conspiracy hatched by the conspirator and the assailant. He has relied on the following decisions of the Supreme Court to submit that the offence of criminal conspiracy was not made out/proven against the conspirator. In V.C. Shukla Vs. State (Delhi Administration), (1980) 2 SCC 665; State of Kerala Vs. P. Sugathan & Anr., 2000 SCC (Cri.) 1474; Mohd. Khalid Vs. State of West Bengal, 2002 SCC (Cri.) 1734; Central Bureau of Investigation, Hyderabad Vs. K. Narayana Rao, (2012) 9 SCC 512; R. Shaji Vs. State of Kerala, AIR 2013 SC 651 and Desh Deepak Kumar Vihangam @ Deepak Kumar Vs. State of Bihar, (2022) 7 SCC 721.

69. Sri Manish Goyal, learned Additional Advocate General would submit that Lifeline Diagnostic Center is part of Kamla Hospital. In any case, both are situated on the first floor of the building described as D.K. Tower. Only a gallery separates the two i.e. Lifeline Diagnostic Center and the Kamla Hospital. Referring to the site plan, he would suggest that the gallery is closed with a channel gate on the west side just after the room where the occurrence took place. There are four other rooms to the east, all in one row - adjacent to the room where the occurrence took place, along the same gallery, from east to west. Whether the diagnostic center was part of the hospital and if it came to be described differently by different prosecution witness, may only lead to inconsequential discrepancy inasmuch as it was not a fact in issue. What is material is that the prosecution asserted from beginning to end that the occurrence took place in the room described as "V", in the site plan. That is the room described as the ultrasound room. Clearly, it is across a gallery, on the other side of that existed Kamla Hospital. Both premises thus described being located on the same floor, separated by a gallery, different description given to that room - either as part of Lifeline Diagnostic Center or Kamla Hospital, is of no relevance. In either consequence, the room location where the occurrence took place would be the same. No benefit may be drawn by the defence, on that count.

70. Next, it has been asserted, it was the prosecution story that the deceased was shot at by the assailant who fired repeated shots, in quick succession. Therefore, use of the Hindi word 'tabadtod' does not indicate that more than two bullets had been fired. Insofar as the prosecution has been able to successfully prove that two firearm injuries had been suffered by the deceased and both injuries were caused by the assailant, no further burden may be placed on the prosecution, to establish that more than two firearm shots were fired in the occurrence.

71. The FIR itself was lodged promptly, at 4:40 p.m. Since the Police Station barely 500 mts. from the place of occurrence and the FIR was lodged by the minor son of the deceased, no doubt may arise as to the occurrence and its prompt reporting. The first informant clearly disclosed from beginning and successfully proved at the trial that he was present at the time and place of occurrence. He had seen the assailant shoot the deceased and flee from the place of occurrence. He also saw and proved that the conspirator reached the place of occurrence and collaborated with the assailant, to cause the occurrence. He also disclosed and proved the motive for the occurrence-being long standing property disputes between the deceased (on one hand) and the assailant and conspirator (on the other hand).

72. As to the defence submission that the FIR was inherently flawed and could not be acted upon, for reason of the original Written Report not proved, it has been submitted, in the nature of occurrence and its prompt reporting, it was not necessary for the prosecution to prove the Written Report, in original. To the extent, Yash Kumar Gupta (P.W.-2), the first informant stood by the fact that he had lodged the F.I.R. on the strength of the document Ex. Ka-2 and further insofar as the Head Constable Heera Lal (P.W.-1) proved that the F.I.R. was registered on the strength of that information received from P.W.-2 through the same document, no inherent or fundamental defect exists in the prosecution case as may lead to any benefit of doubt or relief of acquittal. What emerged at the trial by way of oral and documentary evidence-to prove the occurrence is enough to sustain the conviction. Whether the F.I.R. was registered on the strength of a photocopied document or the original, in face of that prompt F.I.R. being lodged with respect to the occurrence (that is not in doubt), the existence of a photo copied document does not weaken the prosecution story.

73. Insofar as the defence has been unable to bring out any reasonable doubt in the substantive evidence led by the prosecution - to prove that the occurrence was caused by the assailant and a criminal conspiracy was hatched by the assailant and the conspirator, to cause that occurrence, the submission based on photocopied Written Report, must fade into insignificance.

74. On the issue of the recovery of firearm, it has been submitted, merely because the ballistic report does not corroborate that the occurrence was caused by the weapon thus recovered, it may not lead to an inference that the occurrence was not caused by the assailant. The ballistic report remains an expert opinion. It may not not be given undue emphasis, to override ocular evidence that remained unimpeached substantive evidence, at the trial.

75. As to the autopsy report and the statement of Dr. Sant Lal Kannaujiya (P.W.-3), he would submit that the same has not been doubted by the defence, to any extent. Thus, the occurrence is shown to have been caused by the assailant, in the manner described.

76. Heavy reliance has been placed on the element of motive proven at the trial. Learned A.G.A. has also referred to the prior occurrence reported by the deceased against the appellant alleging commission of heinous offence under Section 376 I.P.C. Therein, her statement was also recorded under Section 164 Cr.P.C. Largely for that and also for reason of property disputes, the assailant had motive, duly proven at the trial, to cause the occurrence. Alternatively, it has been submitted, in face of unimpeachable ocular evidence, the issue of motive may remain secondary and non-decisive.

77. In support of his submissions, reliance has been placed on three decisions of the Supreme Court in Sunil Kumar vs State Govt. of NCT of Delhi, (2003) 11 SCC 367; State of Rajasthan vs Arjun Singh & Ors., (2011) 9 SCC 115 and, Goverdhan & Anr. vs State of Chhattisgarh, (2025) SCC OnLine SC 69. He would submit, to sustain the conviction, evidence of a single eye-witness is enough. The weight of evidence arises not by the quantity but by the quantity of evidence led. Here, the prosecution story has been proved on the strength of Yash Kumar Gupta (P.W.-2) who is the son of the deceased and younger brother of the conspirator and brother-in-law of the assailant. No doubt, less so reasonable doubt emerged during his extensive cross-examination, that lasted over months. Merely because he may have spoken a word here or a word there, may not be torn out of context and in any case it may not be forgotten that his age was about 14 years on the date of occurrence and 17 years on the date of statement being recorded. Despite that trauma suffered, he truthfully established the occurrence.

78. Next, reliance has been placed on Manjit Singh & Anr. vs State of Punjab & Anr., (2013) 12 SCC 746 and Pruthiviraj Jayantibhai Vanol vs Dinesh Dayabhai Vala & Ors., (2022) 18 SCC 683 to submit once ocular evidence is wholly corroborated by medical evidence, other discrepancy if any, may remain insignificant and not relevant. The prosecution may only be burdened to prove the occurrence beyond reasonable doubt but not with empirical correctness. Next, reliance has been placed on Baban Shankar Daphal & Ors. vs State of Maharashtra, (2025) SCC OnLine SC 137, to submit minor discrepancies in the testimony of different witnesses must be ignored and may remain immaterial. Insofar as the testimony of the star witness produced by the prosecution, namely, Yash Kumar Gupta (P.W.-2) remained unimpeached, no interference may be warranted in the order of conviction.

79. Last, reliance has been placed on Rama Devi vs State of Bihar & Ors., (2024) 10 SCC 462; State of Rajasthan vs Arjun Singh (supra) and Manjit Singh & Anr. vs State of Punjab (supra), to further submit, mere non-recovery of all projectiles and failure of ballistic report may not be a ground for acquittal when through other credible evidence, it has been duly proven that the occurrence had taken place. Here again, relying on the testimony of Yash Kumar Gupta (P.W.-2), it has been asserted, ocular evidence is unequivocally clear and free of doubt, as to its truthfulness and completeness of the basic occurrence. Therefore, the order of the conviction does not call for any interference.

80. Having heard learned counsel for the parties and having perused the record, first it may be noted that there is no doubt that the occurrence took place inside the building D. K. Tower, in a room described as 'ultrasound room', on the first floor of that building. That room is situated on the western end of the gallery (running East-West). It is located on the north side of that gallery. That much is not disputed to the defence. Thereafter, the fact whether the said room was part of the Lifeline Diagnostic Centre or Kamla Hospital or whether Lifeline Diagnostic Centre itself was part of Kamla Hospital shown towards the south side of the gallery that separates the two (as marked on the site-plan and as relied by the prosecution), is found to be a non-relevant fact, for this trial/appeal.

81. As to the place of occurrence, it has been proven that the same is inside that room - where the deceased was present, when she was shot. Also, as to the injuries received by the deceased, there is no doubt. She received two firearm injuries one on her neck region and the other in her abdominal region. Again, it is not disputed to either party that the first injury was caused by a 12 bore firearm using a pellet-filled cartridge projectile. According to the prosecution case, not only 39 pellets were recovered from inside the dead body of the deceased-caused by that firearm injury, but also pieces of plastic wad described as 'carbaveding' were discovered. Also, there was blackening around the entry wound. The other firearm injury was received by the deceased of which the entry wound was around her navel and the exit wound, on her back. That is not disputed to have been caused by use of a weapon of 32 bore. Also, it is not disputed to either party that that wound was clearly caused by a bullet projectile. No pellet recovery whatsoever and no other evidence exists, of that injury caused in any other manner. That injury caused is a through and through wound. In those admitted facts, we have to test the prosecution story of the occurrence caused, in the manner described.

82. We are also inclined to accept the submission advanced by the State, in the facts and circumstances of the present case, that the existence of photocopy Written Report is of no consequence. There is no doubt that the FIR was lodged on 13.12.2014 itself and also there is no doubt that the occurrence itself had taken place at about 04.00 pm. Therefore, we accept - on whatever strength, the FIR came to be registered. Undoubtedly, the Written Report appears to be a photocopy of an original that may have existed. Though that original was never produced, it may be of less significance since there is nothing to doubt the occurrence of gunshots suffered by the deceased. In such facts, the prosecution story has to be tested on the quality of evidence led at the trial, to prove that the occurrence was caused by the appellants.

83. In that we find that prosecution story arises and rests, totally on the solitary testimony of Yash Kumar Gupta (P.W.-2) who was aged about 14 years on the date of occurrence. Therefore, he has to be described as a 'child witness'. The only other fact witness of substance produced by the prosecution, is PW-3 Rajesh Kumar Gupta, the brother-in-law (dewar) of the deceased. However, he did not see the occurrence.

84. According to Yash Kumar Gupta (P.W.-2), he was present at the time and place of occurrence, with the deceased. In such circumstances, he disclosed in the FIR that the assailant reached the place of occurrence and shot at the deceased many times. She died. He first disclosed that the occurrence took place on the first-floor of the building, D. K. Tower, inside the ultrasound room. At the same time, he disclosed that two other persons described only as ladies were present inside that room. They were applying 'Mehandi' to the hands of the deceased, when the assailant (who also resides on the first-floor of the D. K. Tower), entered that room and shot at the deceased with a country made pistol. On receiving that/first firearm injury, the deceased fell on the table. Thereafter, the assailant caused many firearm injuries to the deceased, in quick succession. That he described in Hindi as - "tabadtod kai fire kiya". As to the role of the conspirator, he stated that she arrived at the place of occurrence thereafter, and spoke words to the effect that they (i.e. the assailant and herself), should leave as the old lady had been done away. He further disclosed, he saw the assailant flee from the place of occurrence with a single country made firearm, described as 'tamancha'. He also stated, many persons saw that occurrence. It had caused commotion. However, none came forward to help him and that all employees in the ultrasound centre also fled from that place. The shopkeepers also downed their shutters.

85. As to motive, he disclosed pre-existing property disputes between the deceased and the appellants. In that the assailant was trying to grab the ancestral properties of the said witness and that the assailant wanted to kill him (PW-2) also. At the same time, he disclosed that, no word was spoken to him by the assailant at the time and place of occurrence and no harm came to him. He also stated that earlier the deceased had lodged a case against the assailant alleging rape, wherein her statement had been recorded under Section 164 Cr.P.C. As to the scribe of such FIR, he disclosed that it was written by Mahesh Chandra Srivastava, an Advocate.

86. During his cross examination, the witness began wavering and made further disclosures. First as to his presence, during his cross examination on 15.11.2017, P.W.-2 admitted that he used to go to school and also receive tuition classes at home. As to timings, he disclosed that he used to leave for school at 07.00 in morning and returned after 02.00 pm. As to his activities at home, he stated that he used to change his clothes after returning from school and then have his lunch and do his homework. As to home tuition classes, he disclosed that timing as 4 p.m. to 5 p.m. As to D. K. Tower, which incidentally is a property of his late father, he stated (during his cross examination on 04.06.2018), that he did not frequent that building. He again clarified that he did not use to go there. That statement appears to be correct to the extent he could not make any disclosure as to the number of shops or other details of point of entry into the hospital located inside the building. However, he described, Kamla Hospital and Lifeline Diagnostic Centre are located near each other. On being questioned as to the floor on which such premises are located, he now stated that they were located on the second floor of the building D. K. Tower. He could not offer any description of the Diagnostic Centre and its structures and, he could not provide any details of the shops in that building. He did not have knowledge of the directions with respect of place of occurrence and though he disclosed, there existed shops on the floor where the occurrence took place, he could offer no disclosure of the nature of shops or the nature of goods dealt by them, or the name of any person who may have been running such shop. Yet, he confirmed that two other ladies were present at the time of occurrence. However, it is relevant that no details of those persons have ever been disclosed by the prosecution less so, they were never produced as witnesses. He also could not describe the time when he left for Kamla Hospital, on the fateful day. Further, he also stated that other than the appellants he had not seen other persons at the time of occurrence. Clearly, the said witness was not conversant with the basic facts whether with respect to the place of occurrence as may interest a young child such as nature of goods sold at various shops in a market that he may have visited earlier as also at the time of occurrence.

87. While such unexplained discrepancies exist, we may not have disregarded that testimony in entirety only for that reason alone. It is undoubted that P.W.-2 is a child witness, therefore, he falls in the category of vulnerable witness. It does call upon the court to do a careful examination of his statement before we may trust and proceed further to confirm the conviction on that evidence. In Dattu Ramrao Sakhare vs State of Maharashtra, (1997) 5 SCC 341, it was clearly observed that though a child witness is a competent witness and their statement may be relied even in absence of oath administered yet, the credibility of such evidence would depend upon circumstances of each case. The Court should watch out for element of tutoring that may always arise in the case of a child witness. The Supreme Court further recognized that there may exist no rule or practice requiring corroboration of the statement made by a child witness. Yet, rule of prudence may always be enforced by Courts - to seek corroboration, where required. Pertinent to our discussion, it was observed as below:

"The entire prosecution case rested upon the evidence of Sarubai (PW 2) a child witness aged about 10 years. It is, therefore, necessary to find out as to whether her evidence is corroborated from other evidence on record. A child witness if found competent to depose to the facts and reliable one such evidence could be the basis of conviction. In other words even in the absence of oath the evidence of a child witness can be considered under Section 118 of the Evidence Act provided that such witness is able to understand the questions and able to give rational answers thereof. The evidence of a child witness and credibility thereof would depend upon the circumstances of each case. The only precaution which the court should bear in mind while assessing the evidence of a child witness is that the witness must be a reliable one and his/her demeanour must be like any other competent witness and there is no likelihood of being tutored. There is no rule or practice that in every case the evidence of such a witness be corroborated before a conviction can be allowed to stand but, however as a rule of prudence the court always finds it desirable to have the corroboration to such evidence from other dependable evidence on record. In the light of this well-settled principle we may proceed to consider the evidence of Sarubai (PW 2)."
88. Then, again in Ratansinh Dalsukhbhai Nayak vs State of Gujarat, (2004) 1 SCC 64, after relying on Dattu Ramrao Sakhare (supra), the Supreme Court further elaborated on the vulnerability of a child witness and observed that a child witness may remain amenable to tutoring. Therefore, a more careful scrutiny is required - of such evidence. In that regard, it was observed as below:

"The decision on the question whether the child witness has sufficient intelligence primarily rests with the trial Judge who notices his manners, his apparent possession or lack of intelligence, and the said Judge may resort to any examination which will tend to disclose his capacity and intelligence as well as his understanding of the obligation of an oath. The decision of the trial court may, however, be disturbed by the higher court if from what is preserved in the records, it is clear that his conclusion was erroneous. This precaution is necessary because child witnesses are amenable to tutoring and often live in a world of make-believe. Though it is an established principle that child witnesses are dangerous witnesses as they are pliable and liable to be influenced easily, shaped and moulded, but it is also an accepted norm that if after careful scrutiny of their evidence the court comes to the conclusion that there is an impress of truth in it, there is no obstacle in the way of accepting the evidence of a child witness."
89. Then, in Golla Yelugu Govindu Vs. State of A.P., (2008) 16 SCC 769, again, reliance was placed on Dattu Ramrao Sakhare (supra). Thereafter, principle laid in Dattu Ramrao Sakhare (supra) and Ratansinh Dalsukhbhai Nayak (supra) was reiterated. Last, in Alagupandi vs State of T.N., (2012) 10 SCC 451, again the principal laid down in Dattu Ramrao Sakhare (supra) and Ratansinh Dalsukhbhai Nayak (supra) was reiterated.

90. Therefore, in face of such statements made by P.W.-2, we are not in a position to trust his statement as true. Strong doubts arise for the reasons noted above, chiefly, his admission that he did not frequent D. K. Tower which is consistent to his further statement that he did not know either the directions to its entry point, the shopkeepers or the nature of shops and goods dealt by them or the name of any person working there. Then as per his daily schedule, he used to attend home tuition classes from 4 p.m. to 5 p.m. The occurrence being of 4 p.m., it lends further doubt as to the presence of P.W.-2.

91. As to the backdrop in which the occurrence emerged, on the strength of the statements of P.W.-2 as also P.W.-3, it is also not in dispute that the parties, i.e. the deceased, her husband on one side, P.W.-3 Rajesh Kumar Gupta who is the brother in law- (dewar) of the deceased and the appellant, were involved in multi-pronged, multiple litigation wherein in the first place, civil litigation as was witnessed between Durgesh Kumar Gupta (per-deceased husband of the deceased) and P.W.-3 being (Case no. 811 of 2008). The second nature of litigation experienced was between the deceased, the assailant, the conspirator and P.W.-2 on one side, either as legal representatives of the deceased Durgesh Kumar Gupta or on their own, and P.W.-3 on the other. Those are O.S. Nos. 397 of 2006, 1131 of 2014 and Case No. 851 of 2009. The third variety of litigation being Case Crime No. 143 of 2014, under Sections 376, 307, 452, 323, 504, 506, 147, 148 I.P.C. lodged by the deceased against the appellant. A fourth variety of criminal cases exist being lodged by the assailant against P.W.-3 exists, one being Criminal Case No. 4989 of 2011 alleging offence under Section 138 of the N.I. Act and another alleging offence under Section 500 IPC.

92. The above facts are clearly proven not by way of defence evidence but by way of reluctant admissions made both by Yash Kumar Gupta (P.W.-2) and Rajesh Kumar Gupta (P.W.-3), during their elaborate cross-examination.

93. Thus, it is noted, while the occurrence took place later, preceding that, the parties had consistently and over a long period experienced turbulent relations. In that, one thing has remained certain and consistent that late Durgesh Kumar Gupta (the husband of the deceased) and the deceased along with her two children were always in civil litigation with Rajesh Kumar Gupta (P.W.-3), with respect to various properties. That litigation spilled over to the next generation, inasmuch as, on the death of Durgesh Kumar Gupta, the deceased, the conspirator, Yash Kumar Gupta (P.W.-2) and some times even the assailant were impleaded as parties (either plaintiff or respondent) in proceedings instituted by or against Rajesh Kumar Gupta (P.W.-3).

94. It is equally true that during his cross-examination, Rajesh Kumar Gupta (P.W.-3) categorically admitted existence of pleadings made by him making allegation against the deceased, the assailant and the conspirator, with respect to his civil rights over certain properties. Thus, he admitted during his cross-examination that he had filed O.S. No. 397 of 2006 against his brother (Late) Durgesh Kumar Gupta and that in those proceedings, he filed an application seeking to restrain the conspirator from selling any of the suit properties.

95. It equally could not be denied by Rajesh Kumar Gupta (P.W.-3) that the assailant had earlier instituted a proceeding under Section 138 of the NI Act with respect to dishonour of a cheque of Rs.32 lakhs. He also could not deny another proceedings instituted by the assailant under Section 500 IPC.

96. Thus, only in the context of such disputes, we record, Rajesh Kumar Gupta (P.W.-3) was always inimical to the civil rights of Durgesh Kumar Gupta and his family including the present appellants and vice versa. On proven facts, it is seen, disputes always existed between them as to their rights. Wherever any ancestral property existed, Rajesh Kumar Gupta (P.W.-3) claimed interest and he opposed the claim of the Durgesh Kumar Gupta and his family including the present appellants. To that extent, he never made any distinction between the present appellants and the deceased and her son Yash Kumar Gupta (P.W.-2). He had specific grievance against the assailant with respect to two criminal cases lodged by the assailant against P.W.-3.

97. In the above context, no evidence was produced by the prosecution of any normal social relationship existing between Rajesh Kumar Gupta (P.W.-3) and the deceased and Yash Kumar Gupta (P.W.-2), preceding the occurrence. They remained inimical to each other (in the civil sense) and were thus distanced in law and in life, on the date of the occurrence. Hence, it has to be recognized that normal relationship did not exist between the deceased and P.W.-3. Yash Kumar Gupta (P.W.-2) clearly stated, and it appears true that in such circumstances, he had never visited the home of his uncle. Yet, all the jewellery of the deceased was lying with Rajesh Kumar Gupta (P.W.-3), after the death of the deceased.

98. Thus, we also find that Yash Kumar Gupta (P.W.-2) first stated that there existed a family business by the name Mirch Masala Restaurant. Extensive cross-examination was made. He stood by his stand consistently that that business was conducted first by his mother (deceased) and now by him. During that extensive cross-examination, he never ever took the name of P.W.-3 Rajesh Kumar Gupta, his paternal uncle, with respect to any help offered by him, in the running of that business. Correspondingly, the testimony of Rajesh Kumar Gupta (P.W.-3), corroborates that he maintained his separate business throughout. No activity or business was shown to exist, either with his pre-deceased brother Durgesh Kumar Gupta or with the deceased or with P.W.-2, that may have been common to the two branches of the same family, namely the branch represented by (Late) Durgesh Kumar Gupta and the branch represented by Rajesh Kumar Gupta (P.W.-3). Therefore, we have no hesitation to record that the parties had nothing in common, except numerous litigation both civil and criminal. It is in such circumstance, Yash Kumar Gupta (P.W.-2) gave in on 04.01.2018 and admitted that after the death of his mother, her entire jewellery was with Rajesh Kumar Gupta (P.W.-3).

99. In that context, though we are not disputing that the FIR was lodged by Yash Kumar Gupta (P.W.-2), yet, he never claimed and he never proved that the said FIR was lodged on his own. He consistently maintained that the same was written by another person who he chose to describe as Mahesh Chandra Srivastava (a practicing lawyer of civil court). Extensive cross-examination was offered to question that line. P.W.-2 maintained that the Written Report was written by the scribe Mahesh Chandra Srivastava. In that view, the statement of D.W.-1 Mahesh Chandra Srivastava is relevant. He denied that he wrote that report. Since, it remains admitted to the prosecution that the Written Report (original) was not written by Yash Kumar Gupta P.W.-2 on his own, rather, it was submitted through a third person and Mahesh Chandra Srivastava denied his working on the Written Report, it is questionable how the presence of Mahesh Chandra Srivastava, emerged. The authorship of Mahesh Chandra Srivatasav was described by P.W.-2 to have arisen as the scribe, having reached along with his two uncles namely Rajesh Kumar Gupta (P.W.-3) and Suresh Chandra Gupta (not examined at the trial). Also, the prosecution never cross-examined that defence witness D.W.-1 and it never doubted the fact that original Written Report was not written by D.W.-1, though it was upon the prosecution to doubt his oral testimony on whatever line of reasoning that may have been open, such cross-examination never arose. Also, P.W.-2 did not offer a consistent account of the place where and the time when he met D.W.-1. He stated all i.e. P.W.-3 reached the place of occurrence and met him there. Both his uncles i.e. P.W.-3 and Suresh Kumar Gupta reached his residence with D.W.-1 and that such persons reached his restaurant 'Mirch Masala'. In any case, he consistently stated that he met those parties first and lodged the FIR, later.

100. Therefore, we reach a further conclusion that the writing of the Written Report was of a third person and not of the informant. That writing was never proven at the trial. In the context of his statements noted just above, the time gap between the occurrence at 04.00 pm and the FIR being written at 04.40 pm the presence P.W.-3 is not believable. He may have reached the place sometimes after the occurrence had been caused. It cannot be ruled out that P.W.-3 caused the FIR narration to arise as his presence after the occurrence and before the FIR was lodged is admitted. Here, according to P.W.-2 himself, the scribe (whoever it be) was accompanied by Rajesh Kumar Gupta (P.W.-3) and his other uncle (not examined at the trial). As noted above, P.W.-3 had a pre-existing grouse against the deceased, the appellant and the vulnerable boy (P.W.-2). Therefore, we are unable to accept that the FIR arose at the instance of P.W.-2 or that it contains his ocular version of the occurrence. It also doubtful, that the FIR would have been lodged at 4:40 p.m. as disclosed. After the occurrence, P.W.-2 is disclosed to have been traumatised. He met his uncles and their lawyer and thereafter lodged the FIR. In the meanwhile he also travelled to his home and restaurant. That would have taken time.

101. As to the testimony of P.W.-3 Rajesh Kumar Gupta, we find, besides the admission of cases lodged by and against him, by his pre-deceased brother Durgesh Kumar Gupta, the deceased, the appellants and the cases lodged by him against those parties, as to the occurrence and further criminal cases lodged by the assailant, his conduct in that regard was not forthcoming. Rather, his statements were forcibly extracted. He first claimed ignorance of existence of civil dispute but admitted to those only when confronted with specific case particulars or orders or pleadings. Those have already been referred to above, while referring to his testimony.

102. Keeping that in mind, more than reasonable doubt arises as to the truthfulness of the statement made by P.W.-2 and P.W.-3. In any case, in view of the per-existing disputes, we are inclined to label the status of P.W.-3 as an inimical interested witness, having motive against the appellants and therefore not willing to speak the truth to the Court. He had motive and every reason to not speak such truth for reason of various civil litigation involving the family of late Durgesh Kumar Gupta and the deceased. He stood to gain by making such false accusation against the appellants, as Yash Kumar Gupta (PW-2) was barely 14 years of age. Both his parents being dead, he was at risk of falling upon whatever family he was left with, once his brother-in-law and sister were thus implicated in a heinous crime of murder of the deceased.

103. As to his presence, in view of what has been noted above, his testimony does not inspire confidence. He claims to have been present at his shop located at some distance from the place of occurrence. He further claims to have been told about the occurrence by unknown persons who though unknown to him, were able to tell him that his sister-in-law had been shot dead. In that he further claims to have walked to the place at a quick pace when, according to him, he saw the assailant flee in a nervous state. In the entirety of facts already noted above, we are unable to believe any part of his testimony to be true or reliable as may ever result in conviction for a heinous offence of murder.

104. In view of what we have noted above, we are also not in a position to place reliance on the statement of Yash Kumar Gupta (P.W.-2). Besides what has been noted above, in cases based on single eye-witness account, though he may not be disbelieved and rather some margin may always exist to overlook some inaccuracies and inconsistencies in the statement of such witness, however, here the facts are completely different.

105. As to conviction on the testimony of a single eye-witness, the rule is clear. In Vadivelu Thevar Vs State of Madras, AIR 1957 SC 614, the Supreme Court observed as below.

"The matter thus must depend upon the circumstances of each case and the quality of the evidence of the single witness whose testimony has to be either accepted or rejected. If such a testimony is found by the court to be entirely reliable, there is no legal impediment to the conviction of the accused person on such proof. Even as the quilt of an accused person may be proved by the testimony of a single witness, the Innocence of an accused person may be established on the testimony of a single witness, even though a considerable number of witnesses may be forthcoming to testify to the truth of the case for the prosecution. Hence, in our opinion, it is a sound and well-established rule of law that the court is concerned with the quality and not with the quantity of the evidence necessary for proving or disproving a fact. Generally speaking, oral testimony in this context may be classified into three categories, namely:
(1) Wholly reliable.
(2) Wholly unreliable.
(3) Neither wholly reliable nor wholly unreliable.
In the first category of proof, the court should have no difficulty in coming to its conclusion either way it may convict or may acquit on the testimony of a single witness, if it is found to be above reproach or suspicion of interestedness, incompetence or subornation. In the second category, the court equally has no difficulty in coming to its conclusion. It is in the third category of cases, that the court has to be circumspect and has to look for corroboration in material particulars by reliable testimony, direct or circumstantial. There is another danger in insisting on plurality of witnesses. Irrespective of the quality of the oral evidence of a single witness, if courts were to insist on plurality of witnesses in proof of any fact, they will be indirectly encouraging subornation of witnesses. Situations may arise and do arise where only a single person is available to give evidence in support of a disputed fact. The court naturally has to weigh carefully such a testimony and if it is satisfied that the evidence is reliable and free from all taints which tend to render oral testimony open to suspicion, it becomes its duty to act upon such testimony. The law reports contain many precedents where the court had to depend and act upon the testimony of a single witness in support of the prosecution. There are exceptions to this rule, for example, in cases of sexual offences or of the testimony of an approver; both these are cases in which the oral testimony is, by its very nature, suspect, being that of a participator in crime. But, where there are no such exceptional reasons operating, it becomes the duty of the court to convict, if it is satisfied that the testimony of a single witness is entirely reliable. We have therefore, no reasons to refuse to act upon the testimony of the first witness, which is the only reliable evidence in support of the prosecution."

106. Then, in Joseph vs State of Kerala, (2003) 1 SCC 465, with respect to testimony of single eye-witness, the Supreme Court further observed:

"To our mind, it appears that the High Court did not follow the aforesaid standard but went on to analyse evidence as if the material before them was given for the first time and not in appeal. Section 134 of the Indian Evidence Act provides that no particular number of witnesses shall in any case be required for the proof of any fact and, therefore, it is permissible for a court to record and sustain a conviction on the evidence of a solitary eve witness But, at the same time, such a course can be adopted only if the evidence tendered by such witness is cogent, reliable and in tune with probabilities and inspires implicit confidence. By this standard, when the prosecution case rests mainly on the sole testimony of an eyewitness, it should be wholly reliable. Even though such witness is an injured witness and his presence may not be seriously doubted, when his evidence is in conflict with other evidence, the view taken by the trial court that it would be unsafe to convict the accused on his sole testimony cannot be stated to be unreasonable."
107. Again, in Bhimapa Chandappa Hosamani vs State of Karnataka, (2006) 11 SCC 323, word of caution was added by the Supreme Court, a Court may pass the order of conviction, solely on that testimony. It observed as below:

"We have undertaken a very close and critical scrutiny of the evidence of PW 1 and the other evidence on record only with a view to ossess whether the evidence of PW 1 is of such quality that a conviction for the offence of murder can be safely rested on her sole testimony. This Court has repeatedly observed that on the basis of the testimony of a single eyewitness a conviction may be recorded, but it has also cautioned that while doing so the court must be satisfied that the testimony of the solitary eyewitness is of such sterling quality that the court finds it safe to base a conviction solely on the testimony of that witness. In doing so the court must test the credibility of the witness by reference to the quality of his evidence. The evidence must be free of any blemish or suspicion, must impress the court as wholly truthful, must appear to be natural and so convincing that the court has no hesitation in recording a conviction solely on the basis of the testimony of a single witness."
108. Most crucially, he consistently described one firearm borne by the assailant. Yet, he described multiple firearm injuries caused to the deceased after the first shot had been fired and the deceased fell over. Even if we overlook the word "tabadtod" used by him and read it to be only two shots fired, the prosecution has failed to establish either - which of the two injuries was caused first and it has failed to prove use of two different types of firearm in the occurrence. In the admitted facts as noted above, two firearm injuries were caused by two different firearms, of two different caliber, with use of two completely different projectiles-one a cartridge and another a bullet. No whisper of evidence arose, of use of two weapons. Though the prosecution described one weapon to the assailant, in absence of any prosecution case/evidence that the assailant was carrying two firearms (of the nature as may have corroborated the injuries), in entirety, we are left with no option but to conclude that Yash Kumar Gupta (P.W.-2) was not present at the time and place of occurrence. Therefore, he had not seen the occurrence that was parrotted by him, in the manner told to him, at that traumatic time, by someone else, probably (P.W.-3).

109. There is another strong reason to doubt the presence of P.W.-2 and the motive assigned by him to the appellants. The entire prosecution story rests on the motive assigned to the appellants to kill the deceased only to grab all properties of the deceased and P.W.-2. P.W.-2 also stated that the appellants wanted to kill him. Yet, during his cross examination, he maintained that no word was spoken to him and no harm was caused to him in the occurrence.

110. Unfortunately, the child witness appears to have described what he was told. It was for the prosecution to prove its case. It never led any evidence of two weapons used by the assailant. Also, the ballistic report clearly suggests that the firearm allegedly recovered was not one that he caused the occurrence. In the present case it is not the flawed recovery but the falsity of the prosecution allegation, that persuades us to interfere.

111. As to the motive, as noted and discussed above, it is fundamental to criminal jurisprudence that the same is a double-edged sword. Just as motive has been described by the prosecution for reason of civil and criminal case proceedings between the appellant and the deceased, as noted above there are multi directional litigation between the parties. Therefore, the motive cited is of less significance especially in absence of any disclosure made or proven fact that the assailant was in any fear of any punishment arising in near future or otherwise with respect to criminal prosecution described to have been lodged by the deceased.

112. In Ruli Ram vs State of Haryana, (2002) 7 SCC 691, it was observed as below:

"7. So far as the acceptability of evidence is concerned, the trial court and the High Court analysed the evidence in detail and have held it to be plausible and acceptable, and that it suffers from no infirmity. It has been noted that in a faction-ridden village, independent witnesses, as submitted by the learned counsel for the accused-appellant, are difficult to get. Enmity is a double-edged sword. While it can be a basis for false implication, it can also be a basis for the crime. The court has to weigh the evidence carefully and if after doing so, holds the evidence to be acceptable, the accused cannot take the plea that it should not be acted upon. When a plea of false implication is advanced by the accused, foundation for the same has to be established. We do not find any reason to differ from the courts below on the factual aspects."
(emphasis supplied)

113. Once the basic foundation of the prosecution case falls, motive may remain inconsequential. That observation exists in State of Punjab vs Sucha Singh & Ors., (2003) 3 SCC 153 wherein it has been observed as below:

"11. Mr Walia, learned counsel, lastly contended that there is a strong motive connecting the accused with the crime for the reason that Kuldip Singh, nephew of accused Sucha Singh was murdered by the complainant party and the accused had nursed a grudge against the complainant party for revenge. This plea is of no help to the prosecution case. When the basic foundation of the prosecution case crumbled down, the motive becomes inconsequential. At the same time, animosity is a double-edged sword. It could be a ground for false implication, it could also be a ground for assault. In the instant case, in view of the facts and circumstances as discussed above, the motive, however strong, merely creates a suspicion. Suspicion cannot take the place of proof of guilt."
(emphasis supplied)

114. In Ramashish Rai vs Jagdish Singh, (2005) 10 SCC 498, enmity was described as double-edged sword. It was recognized that there can be ground for false implication as well. The Court must examine the testimony of inimical witnesses with due caution and diligence. It that regard, it was observed as below:

"7. We are clearly of the view that the findings of the High Court were erroneous, resulting in grave miscarriage of justice. The eyewitnesses -- PWs 1, 2, 3, 5, 8 and 10 consistently supported the case of the prosecution throughout. They were subjected to lengthy cross-examination but nothing could be elicited from their mouth so as to discard the creditworthiness of their statements. The ocular evidence of the eyewitnesses was corroborated in material particulars by the medical evidence. In our view, therefore, the acquittal recorded by the High Court on the aforesaid reasoning is perverse. The High Court discarded the eyewitness account, branded them as inimical witnesses. This is not the requirement of law. The requirement of law is that the testimony of inimical witnesses has to be considered with caution. If otherwise the witnesses are true and reliable their testimony cannot be thrown out on the threshold by branding them as inimical witnesses. By now, it is well-settled principle of law that enmity is a double-edged sword. It can be a ground for false implication. It also can be a ground for assault. Therefore, a duty is cast upon the court to examine the testimony of inimical witnesses with due caution and diligence. In the present case the High Court has rejected the otherwise creditworthy testimony of eyewitness account merely on the ground that there was enmity between the prosecution party and the accused party."
(emphasis supplied)

115. In State of U.P. vs Madan Mohan & Ors., (1989) 3 SCC 390, the inference of suppression of the genesis of the crime was inferred, amongst others, for reason of non-examination of witnesses from the locality whose presence would be natural. In that regard, it was observed as below:

"9. There can be no doubt that PW 1 and PW 2 can be said to be chance witnesses. Their residences are a furlong or two away from the scene of occurrence. The story of PW 1 that he closed the shop earlier than usual is difficult to believe because he does not assign any reason for so doing. The allegation that respondent Chander Mohan's complaint was first in point of time but was registered later cannot be lightly brushed aside. It is also surprising that PW 1 preferred to write down the complaint on the spot rather than run down 100 paces to the police station to inform the police. PW 1 was asked to explain this conduct and he stated that he preferred to write down the complaint "as I had doubt that the police will not pay any heed and will not take down the report correctly". There was no reason for PW 1 to entertain such a doubt. He does not say that he had any such experience in the past. Both the deceased had a criminal record and were history sheeters Several complaints were pending against Ram Shanker. He must be having many enemies. The defence case is that some of their common enemies got together and killed them and PW 1 was not present but came later and filed the report on the basis of the morning incident. Be that as it may, the fact remains that the genesis of the crime is suppressed and no witness from the locality whose presence would be natural is examined which creates a doubt regarding the truth of the prosecution version."
(emphasis supplied)

116. Similarly, in Takhaji Hiraji vs Thakore Kubersing Chamansing & Ors., (2001) 6 SCC 145, not bringing forth the material witnesses was termed as a deficiency in the prosecution as may lead to an adverse inference. In that regard, it was observed as below:

"19. So is the case with the criticism levelled by the High Court on the prosecution case finding fault therewith for non-examination of independent witnesses. It is true that if a material witness, who would unfold the genesis of the incident or an essential part of the prosecution case, not convincingly brought to fore otherwise, or where there is a gap or infirmity in the prosecution case which could have been supplied or made good by examining a witness who though available is not examined, the prosecution case can be termed as suffering from a deficiency and withholding of such a material witness would oblige the court to draw an adverse inference against the prosecution by holding that if the witness would have been examined it would not have supported the prosecution case.............................."
(emphasis supplied)

117. Here, though the prosecution claims that two ladies who were applying 'Mehndi' to the deceased fled and their details were not known, no explanation exists why no employee of the Kailash Hospital or Lifeline Diagnostic Centre and other shopkeepers or neighbour or person who may have been naturally present at the building D. K. Tower, was examined.

118. As to conspiracy, there is absolutely no material to reach a conclusion that there existed any agreement between the assailants and the conspirators, to commit an illegal act that too murder of the deceased. Only evidence led by the prosecution to that effect is of words allegedly heard by P.W.-2 described to have been spoken by the conspirator to the assailant. Those words are only to the effect that the deceased has been done to death. In face of what we have observed with respect to credibility, truthfulness and reliability of the evidence of P.W.-2, his testimony has also to be disregarded as he was not present at the time and place of occurrence as may have ever allowed him to have witnessed such an occurrence. Also, P.W.-3 saw nothing. The prosecution has wrongly proved the occurrence as one caused by the appellants. The most natural witness namely two ladies who were allegedly applying 'Mehndi' to the deceased and/or the staff of Life Line Diagnostic Centre and the shopkeepers of D. K. Tower, were never examined at the trial.

119. The prosecution chose to base its story solely on two witnesses. Both have been disbelieved for reasons noted above. There is no other account existing. We therefore find, the charge of murder was not proven on the assailant, to any extent. Less so, there exists any evidence of criminal conspiracy to cause that occurrence. The appellants are entitled to and are granted a clean acquittal, on all charges levelled.

120. The appeal is allowed. The impugned judgement and order is set aside. Appellant - Amrita Gupta @ Lucky Gupta @ Aliya is on bail. She need not surrender. Her bail bonds are cancelled and sureties are discharged whereas the appellant - Syed Kamar Khusnoor @ Sheru has remained confined for more than ten years. He shall be released forthwith, if he is not wanted in any other case. However, both the appellants shall comply with the mandatory requirements of Section 437-A Cr.P.C. within one month.

 
Order Date :- 7.3.2025
 
Anurag/Abhilash/Prakhar/Prachi
 

 
(Dr. Gautam Chowdhary, J.)     (S.D. Singh, J.) 
================================================================================


################################################################################
                    CATEGORY 5: FAMILY LAW / DIVORCE
                              (5 CASES)
################################################################################

================================================================================
CASE 21:
[Cites 27, Cited by 1]
Karnataka High Court
Saeesh Subhash Hegde S/O Late Subhash ... vs Darshana Saeesh Hegde W/O Saeesh ... on 6 March, 2008
Equivalent citations: AIR 2008 KARNATAKA 142, 2008 (4) AIR KANT HCR 46, 2008 A I H C 2745, (2008) ILR (KANT) 3881, (2008) 2 HINDULR 617, (2009) 1 ICC 73
Author: Anand Byrareddy
Bench: Anand Byrareddy
ORDER
 

Anand Byrareddy, J.
 

1. Heard the Counsel for the petitioner and the Counsel for the respondent.

2. The brief facts of the case are as follows:

The petitioner is a Goan, born of Goan parents, and had married the respondent on 26.12.2002 in accordance with the Portuguese Family Law, which is applicable to this day in the State of Goa, following the procedure under the provisions of the Portuguese Civil Code (hereinafter referred to as the 'PC Code'). In proof of the same, the petitioner has produced a Marriage Certificate issued by the Office of Civil Registration Offices of Goa dated 13.7.2006.
3. The petitioner and respondent had met in Belgaum when they new students of Gogte Institute of Technology in the year 1998. They were classmates It is contended that they had fallen in love and decided to get married secretly in Goa, as the respondent did not expect her parents to consent to their marriage. And the respondent, according to the petitioner, had gone over to Goa on 31.12.2002 to give the joint declaration in the office of the Sub-Registrar, Margao and again on 26.12.2002, for the solemnisation of marriage. On both days, she had returned to Belgaum on the same day to avoid raising any suspicion in the minds of her parents.

4. The petitioner contends that the petitioner and the respondent had signed a declaration as required under Article 1075 of the PC Code declaring their intention to get married arid had presented it to the Office of the Sub-Registrar, Margao on 11.12.2002. A notice indicating the intention was displayed on the Notice Board of the said office inviting objections to the proposed marriage from the public within fifteen days, as required under Article 1076 of the P.C. Code. As there were no objections, the Sub-Registrar had solemnised the marriage in accordance with Article 1081 of the PC Code on 26.12.2002.

5. The petitioner and the respondent were thus named under the regime of a communion of assets and are governed by the relevant provisions of the P.C. Code.

6. Her parents, on coming to know of the marriage on 12.4.2003, had reconciled to the fact and had thereafter arranged a formal engagement ceremony on. 19.9.2003 at Belgaum and a religious marriage ceremony was also held in Goa at Ramnathi Temple Hall, Fatorda, Margao on 17.11.2003, They resided at their matrimonial home at Fatorda, Margao from 17.11.2003.

7. In May 2004, the respondent had raised a complaint that she was not prepared to continue to live with the petitioner, if his mother and Ms bachelor brother also continued to live along with them. Since the petitioner dismissed the idea, the respondent was wholly dissatisfied. On 13.12.2005, she is said to have left for Belgaum and failed to return to their matrimonial home. The petition attempts to contact her were resisted. Thereafter, the respondent is said to have instituted a matrimonial case before the Family Court, Belgaum in M.C. No. 75/2006 under Section 13(1)(ia) of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 (hereinafter referred to as the "HM Act" for brevity) on the several allegations made therein. She had also filed an application under Section 24 of the HM Act claiming maintenance and litigation expenses.

8. The petitioner had appealed before the Family Court and fled his written statement and raised a preliminary objection, that the petition filed under the Act was not maintainable and that the Family Court at Belgaum had no jurisdiction to entertain the case This was treated as a preliminary issue, By an order dated 5.1.2007, the Family Court has rejected the petitioner's objection, It is this, which is under challenge in the present, writ petition.

9. It 13 contended that though a religious marriage was performed on 17.11.2003, as was customary in Goa amongst all Hindu Goans, where members of the two spousal families and them friends and relatives participate, This did not imply that their marriage was to be governed by the HM Act.

10. The Counsel for the petitioner would submit that the petitioner and the respondent are governed by the Portuguese Family Law. Therefore, the matrimonial case filed under the HM Act is not maintainable. The Family Court is not a Court contemplated under the Portuguese Family Law which envisages a Court constituted tinder Portuguese Law. That the Family Court has failed to appreciate that it is not a Court of domicile or a Court having jurisdiction over the place where the respondent resides within the meaning of Article 5 of the Portuguese Family Law. The Portuguese Family Law contains special provisions regarding dissolution of marriage with specific grounds under which a divorce can he granted which includes, adultery, conviction in a criminal case, ill-treatment or serious injuries, complete abandonment of conjugal domicile, incurable unsoundness of mind, de facto separation, contagious disease and so on.

11. It is contended that a suit for divorce can be instituted either in the Court of domicile or in the Court having, jurisdiction over the place where the plaintiff has his or her residence. But should this plaintiff reside in a foreign country, the respective suit shall be instituted in the Court of Division of Lisbon, Portugal.

12. The Counsel has relied on the following authorities in support of the case that the Family Court, at Belgaum does not have jurisdiction to entertain the above said case.

- Parwatawwa v. Channawwa AIR 1966 Mysore 100,

- K. Radha Krishnan Nayyar v. Smt. Radha

- Monica Variato v. Thomas Variato, Letters Patent Appeal No. 31/1998, High Court of Bombay at Goa

- D.P. Joshi v. State of Madhya Bharat and Anr.

- Smt. Sathya v. Teja Singh

- Smt. Surinder Kaur Sandhu v. Harbax Singh Sandhu and Anr. .

13. The Counsel for the respondent, on the other hand, has contended as follows:

That the Family Court, has addressed the several contentions raised by the petitioner and has rightly held in favour of the respondent. There is no illegality or infinnity in the order passed by the Court below. The petitioner is guilty of suppression of material facts. The petitioner had chosen to misuse the respondent's innocence Further, that the petitioner's remedy would be to file a petition under Section 25 of the Code of Civil. Procedure, 1908 before the Supreme Court of India and that this Court would have no jurisdiction to deal with the Writ Petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India. That the HM Act is applicable to all Hindus and that it extends to the whole of India and Hindus Jiving in Goa are governed under the Act and therefore, the petitioner and the respondent having admittedly married according to the Hindu rites, the Family Court at Belgaum would have jurisdiction and the present petition is only in older to avoid the petitioner's liability to pay maintenance to the respondent and therefore, the petition be dismissed.
14. The Counsel places reliance on the judgment in J. Fernandes and Co. v. The Deputy Chief Controller of Imports and Exports and Ors. .

15. The Family Court, Belgaum has, by the impugned order, rejected the objection of the petitioner as to jurisdiction, for the following reasons:

That there is no dispute that their marriage was performed at Ramnathi Temple, Fatorda, Margao as per Hindu customs on 17.11.2003 and though the marriage was also registered under the P.C. Code, Article 5 of the Law of Divorce, Chapter-II, on dissolution of marriage pertaining to Portuguese Family Laws, docs provide that a suit for divorce shall be instituted either in the Court of Domicile or in the Court having jurisdiction over the place where the plaintiff resides. Since the respondent, who was the petitioner in the matrimonial case, was residing at Belgaum, the said Article would provide jurisdiction to the Family Court at Belgaum.
16. Further, since the petitioner and the respondent are Hindus by religion and their marriage having been performed according to the Hindu customary rights, they are governed by Hindu Law and accordingly, the Family Court would have jurisdiction.

17. Further, the Family Court has also accepted the contents on that even under Section 13 of the Special Marriage Act, 1954 (hereinafter referred to as the 'SM Act', for brevity) a wife who is tine petitioner can present the petition in the Court in whose jurisdiction she resides and therefore has held that the Court would have jurisdiction, The Family Court has also accepted the contention that under Section 7 of the HM Act, the Act is applicable to citizens of India domiciled in territories to which the HM Act extends and therefore, the Court has formed the opinion that it would have jurisdiction to entertain the petition.

18. The questions that, arise for consideration in the present petition are:

a) Whether this Court would have jurisdiction to decide the issues arising for consideration under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitutions of India?
b) Whether the Portuguese Family Law or the Hindu Law would be applicable to the parties herein?
c) If Portuguese Family Law is applicable, which is the Court having jurisdiction and whether the Family Court, Belgaum would have jurisdiction?
19. The first question need not detain this Court for long. This Court has jurisdiction over the Family Court, Belgaum. Under Article 227 of the Constitution of India it is possible for this Court to examine whether the Family Court, Belgaum has acted without. jurisdiction in proceeding to entertain the matrimonial case of the parties, in the face of legal contentions and admitted facts. The answer is in the affirmative See Nibaran Chandrabag v. Mahendranath Ghughu , Rukmanand v. State of Bihar and Anr. , Gujarat Steel v. Mazdoor Sabha and Chandra Prakash Shah v. State of Uttar Pradesh, etc.

20. In order to consider the second and third questions the following authorities are referred to:

(a) The Counsel for the petitioner has produced the text of a welcome address by Shri. Manohar S. Usgaocar, Senior Advocate., and the then President, of the Goa, Daman and Diu Bar Association, at a Conference on "Family Laws in Goa" while welcoming the Chief Guest, the then Chief Justice of India Shri Y.V. Chandrachud. A useful reference may be made to the same. The relevant portion, reads thus:
In this Territory (Goa) we had an uniform Civil Code, which was a self contained Code coveting substantive law on the civil side and having 2538 Articles. It was promulgated in Portugal by an enactment, on 1st July 1867. Article 9 of the said enactment empowered the Government to extend the Civil Code to the Overseas Colonies by introducing amendments necessitated by the special circumstances of each Colony. In exercise of such power, the Government by enactment dated 18.11.1869 extended the Civil Code to the Overseas Colonies with effect from 1" My, 1870, safeguarding the usages and customs of Goa, Daman and Diu which had been codified and to the extent they are not against the morality and public order.
Subsequently, a new enactment was promulgated on 16.2.1888 by which special and private usages and customs of Gentile Hindus of Goa were reviewed and codified in the said enactment, like polygamy in a restricted sense and controlled by the Courts, joint hindu family, prohibition against succession of illegitimate issues except to few persons, adoption, which were saved. The Decree dated 16.2.1888 replaced the Decree of 1852.
There are also similar enactments dated 10.1.1894 and 19.4.1912 saving the usages of non-christian inhabitants of Diu, and Daman respectively.
The Civil Code referred to above is based on the Napoleonic Code It contains, biter alia, the law of domestic relations like family laws arid of succession.
When the said Civil Code was enacted there was monarchy in Portugal. It was replaced by the Republic in 1910. Immediately thereafter important laws on family matters were enacted, to form part of the said Civil Code. They are,: The law of succession was partly changed by enactment dated 33.10.1910 The dissolution of marriage was permitted by divorce, including by mutual consent. Law was enacted on 25.12.1910 to give protection to some of the Law dated 25.10.1910 to regulate the marriages, illegitimate children and their mothers. These were extended to this Union Territory on 26.5.1911 and the last on 30.10.1913.
Article 63 of the marriage law dated 25.12.1910 states that, this law shall come into force simultaneously with the enforcement of the law that makes the civil registration of baths, marriages and deaths compulsory.
The Code of Civil Registration was enacted by the Decree dated 4.11.1912 and was enforced, with effect from 1.1.1914 and the usefulness of these records and acts noted therein is multiple.
In 1930 - by enactment dated 16 12.1930 many provisions of the Civil Code were substantially amended.
In 1940 there was an agreement between the State and the Holy See dated 7.5.1940, In pursuance of the same a new enactment No. 35 461 was passed, dated 22.1.1946 (w.e.f. 4.9.46), whereby the Christian marriages could be performed before the Church authorities upon the production of a no objection certificate from the Registration Officer, appointed under Code of Civil Registration, and such a marriage would have civil effects if transcribed in the Office of Civil Registration. This canonical marriages were declared indissoluble by Article 4 of the said Decree. (sic) two Catholics married canonically could not divorce, but the same relief was available to two catholics married before the Civil Registration Officer.
This was the state of affairs at the time of Liberation of this Territory of Goa, Daman and Diu in 1961. This territory became part and parcel of Union of India by the 12th amendment to the Constitution of India and all the laws in force were maintained by the Goa, Daman and Diu Administration Act of 1962. The Portuguese laws are hence internal laws.
Subsequently, many other Acts in force in the (sic) of the country were extended to this territory like the Transfer of Property Act, the Sale of Goods Ad, the Contract Act, the Easements Act etc., and correspondingly the provisions of the Civil Code stood repealed pro tanto, but the family laws are still in force.
21. To the above historical background the Counsel for the petitioner adds: That, Goa was a Portuguese Colony for over 450 years, before it was liberated, and became part, of India again, in 1961 The Indian Parliament has maintained all the Portuguese Laws then in force in Goa, until amended or repealed by a competent legislature. There is no serious dispute as to the above legislative history.

b) Parwatawwa v. Channawwa AIR 1966 Mysore 100:

In this Case decided by a division bench of this Court, the facts are as follows:
One Siddalingiah died in the year 1954. His wife Siddavva, who survived him, died in the year 1956. One Channavva, claiming, to be the second wife of Siddalingiah, brought a suit claiming that she was married to Siddalingiah in the year 1951 in the Stale of Bombay and she claimed Siddalingiah's properties as his widow to the exclusion of Parwatawwa, who was the daughter of Sid daw a and Siddalingiah Parwatawwa denied the claim. The Munsiff accepted the contention that there was a marriage between Channawwa and Siddalingiah, However, he opined that the marriage was invalid and dismissed the suit. In appeal, the District, Judge found that the marriage was a valid marriage and decreed the suit Parwatawwa was in appeal before this Court. Since the matter involved a question of some importance, it was referred to a Division Bench under the provisions of Section 6 of the Mysore High Court Act.
22. It was not in dispute that Siddalingiah was a permanent resident of the erstwhile State of Hyderabad and that when he married the plaintiff at Nilgond in the then State of Bombay, his first wife was living. After marriage Channawwa lived with Siddalingiah in the State of Hyderabad, until his death. When the marriage between Channawwa and Siddalingiah was performed, there was a law; namely, the Bombay Prevention of Hindu Bigamous Manages Act, 1946 (hereinafter referred to as the 'Bombay Act') forbidding bigamous marriages amongst Hindus. It was for this reason that the Munsiff had held the marriage to be void,. Tine District Judge, in appeal however took the view that the provisions of the Bombay Act did not invalidate a marriage between spouses, one of whom was not domiciled in the State of Bombay., Since Siddalingiah had no Bombay domicile, but was a person with Hyderabad domicile and since there was no Hyderabad Law prohibiting polygamy, the marriage, it was said, was not void, although Channawwa was domiciled m the State of Bombay It was also not in dispute that there was no law operating to the State of Hyderabad prohibiting a polygamous marriage and the Personal Law of Siddalingiah indicated that he had the capacity to contract a polygamous marriage.

23. In this context, the proposition that was examined by the Division Bench of this Court was, whether after the commencement of the Constitution, there was a fusion of the then existing multitude of domiciles and an it became impossible for a citizen of India to have any other domicile than the Indian domicile. On examination of the legal position, this Court held as follows:

(15) The true position, therefore, is that every person belonging to a State forming part of the Union under the Constitution has a status distinct from although subsidiary to that flowing from his Indian, domicile or his political status as an Indian citizen, that status having relevance only for certain purposes. For that purpose, it may be possible to say that while a person has the primary Indian domicile which contributes to the acquisition of citizenship, he may have secondary domicile which is the domicile of the State to which he belongs, although the importance of such secondary domicile has relevance only in some spheres. The recognition of such domicile may become imperative where the higher Indian domicile does not and cannot regulate a matter governed by a State law.
And conducted, upon an extensive study of the case law and other authorities, as follows:

(43) The discussion so far made yields the following two rules:
(a) Where the parties at the time of their marriage are domiciled in a country, the laws of which prohibit their marriage, the marriage is void, whether they are domiciled in the same country or in different countries.
(b) Where the laws of the country in which they are domiciled bestow on both the parties capacity for the marriage, the marriage is a good marriage.
c) K. Radha Krishnan Nayyar v. Radha :
In this case the parties were married at Madras beyond the territorial jurisdiction to which the Jammu and Kashmir Hindu Marriage Act 1980 (hereinafter referred to as the "JKHM Act", for brevity) applied. The husband filed a petition for dissolution of marriage under Section 13 of the JKHM Act in the Court of the District Judge, Jammu The petition was dismissed on the ground of want of territorial jurisdiction. The petitioner had therefore appealed to the High Court at Jammu and Kashmir. The question of law that was considered was whether the forum of jurisdiction is to be determined with reference to the parties, or the solemnisation of marriage between them, or on the basis of their residence under Section 21 of the JKHM Act, which corresponds to Section 19 of the HM Act, both of which sections employ a phrase "residing outside the territories to which this Act extends".
The Court held that in a case where marriage has been solemnised outside the State of Jammu and Kashmir, the forum for filing the petition has to be determined under Section 19 of the HM Act and concluded that persons who were governed by the State of Jammu and Kashmir can get relief only in the State and. not in any other Court in the country under the Central Act, unless both the parties have settled and have become domicile of a place to which the Stat. Act is not applicable but to which the Central Act alone applies, Accordingly, the Court held that since the marries of the parties was solemnised at Madras, where the State Ad was not applicable, the Triad Court had rightly dismissed the petition on the ground of jurisdiction.
d) Monica Variato v. Thomas Vriato 2000(2) Goa. L.T. 149:
In this case, the appellant was a German national who had married the respondent, who was a Goan, under the Special Marriage Act., 1954 at Mumbai. They presented a petition for divorce by mutual consent under Article 36 of the Law of Divorce, 1910 as applicable in the State of Goa before the Civil Judge, Senior Division Mapusa, Goa. A provisional order of divorce, for a period of one year in terms of Article 39 of the Law of Divorce, was passed. After the lapse of one year, the appellant filed, an. application seeking a final decree of divorce. The respondent however, raised objections on a legal issue. It was contended that the appellant continuing to he a German national and their marriage having been solemnised under the provisions of the SM Act, their rights 'and obligations are governed by that Act and that the Law of Divorce, 1910, as applied in the State of Goa would not apply and that he no longer consented for divorce by mutual consent and sought to withdraw his consent.
By way of a rejoinder, it WHS contended that for a period of over ten. years, preceding the filing of the joint application seeking divorce, the parties were domiciled in Goa and hence, it was not open to challenge the jurisdiction of the Court.
The application for divorce was dismissed by the Trial Court, while holding that the marriage was not transcribed before the Civil Registrar's Office, The Court concluded that there was no manage between the appellant and the respondent under the Law of the land (Goa). Further, the Court opined that since the parties had married under the SM Act, the proper course was to apply for divorce under that Act before the Court having jurisdiction.
This order of the Trial Court was append against before a Single Judge of the High Court of Bombay at Goa It was contended that a Portuguese male and a foreigner contracting a marriage in a foreign country would still be governed by the provisions of the P.C. Code pertaining to marriages. On the other hand, it was contended by the respondent that SM Ad had not been extended to the State of Goa as when the Art was exacted, Goa was not a part of India. The Single Judge dismissed the petition while holding that the petition filed under Chapter III of the Law of Divorce, 1910, as applicable in the State of Goa was not maintainable The reason being that, the parties had married under the SM Act and that it was open for the parties to apply for a divorce under Section 28 of the SM Act, The same was challenged before a Division. Bench of the High Court.
24. The Division Bench of the Bombay High Court at Goa opined that since the marriage was admittedly solemnised under the SM Act at Mumbai and thereafter the parties having been domiciled and having had their habitual residence in Goa, if the tests of Private International Law are applied, the law to be applied would be the Law as applicable in the State of Goa and in that situation, the SM Act would not apply. The Court opined that the above view would be the view if principles of English Private International Law are made applicable and the observations of the Supreme Court of India and for the purpose of Private International Law, the marriage solemnised at Mumbai can be deemed to be a marriage in a foreign country and since the parties are domiciled in Goa, Proceedings for divorce would be as per the law enforced in the Stale of Goa. But, insofar as the marriages performed under the Personal Laws prevailing in the constituent States of the Union, it is the Personal Law that would be applicable. Insofar as the parties before the Court were concerned, it would be the SM Act. Though it was on the ground that, they are domiciled in Goa, that the appellant had approached the Court, or alternatively, that the respondent was of Goan origin, as there was no evidence on record, to come to any finding on that ground and since there was no material on record to hold that at the time of marriage, the respondent was governed by the Personal Law in force in Goa, including the law of divorce, the appeal was dismissed.

e) D.P. Joshi v. State of Madhya Bharat and Anr. AIR 1953 SC 334:

The Supreme Court, while addressing the question whether there can be a Madhya Bharat domicile apart from Indian domicile, has held that domicile has reference to the system of law by which a person is governed and when we speak of the domicile of a country, we assume that the same system of law prevails an over that country Bui it might well happen that laws relating to succession and marriage might not be the game all over the country and that different areas in the State might have different laws in respect of those matters. In that case, each area having a distinct set of laws would itself be regarded as a country for the purpose of domicile.
f) Surinder Kaur Sandhu v. Harbax Singh Sandhu :
The wife was the appellant before the Supreme Court. She had married the respondent in Punjab and they had moved to England where a boy was born to them in the next year Within a short while, after the birth of the boy, the relationship between the parties was strained. The respondent-husband was trapped by the Police when he was negotiating with a 'hit man' to have the appellant run over by a car. He was convicted and sentenced to a prison term of three years. After his release from prison, while the appellant was away at work, he had removed the boy from England and bought him to India. The appellant had obtained an order of the High Court of Justice (Family Division) in England under which the boy became a Ward of that Court. She came to India and filed a petition before the jurisdictional Judicial Magistrate seeking for the custody of the child. The Magistrate dismissal the petition accepting the contention of the respondent that he was the natural guardian of the minor. The appellant thereafter, preferred a writ petition before the Punjab and Haryana High Court and the petition was dismissed.
In addressing whether the English Court had jurisdiction to decide the question of child's custody, the Supreme Court has opined that the modern theory of Conflict of Laws recognises and in any event, prefers the jurisdiction of the State which has the most intimate contact, with the issues arising in the case-Jurisdiction is not attracted by the operation or creation of fortuitous circumstances such as the circumstance as to where the child whose custody is in issue, is brought or for the time being lodged. To allow the assumption of jurisdiction by another State in such circumstances will only result in encouraging forum-shopping. Ordinarily, jurisdiction must follow upon functional lines, That is to say, for example, that in matters relating to matrimony and custody, the law of that place must govern which has the closest concern with the well-being of the spouses and the welfare of the off-springs of marriage. The spouses in this case had made England their home where this boy was born to them. The father could not therefore deprive the English Court of its jurisdiction to decide upon his custody by removing him to India, nor in the normal movement of the matrimonial home, but., by the act which was gravely detrimental to the peace of that home and the fact that tine matrimonial home of the spouses was in England establishes sufficient contacts or ties with that State in order to make it reasonable and just for the Courts of that State to assume jurisdiction to enforce obligations which were incurred therein by the spouses.
25. Having regard to the above facts and circumstances and the legal position that emerges from a reference to the above authorities, it is as follows. There is no dispute that the parties were maimed according to the Portuguese Family Law, that is applicable within the State of Goa, and had set up their matrimonial home at Fatorda, Margao. It is the Portuguese Family Law which would apply, insofar as their matrimonial relationship is concerned. The fact that the petitioner and the respondent underwent a Hindu marriage ceremony at a later point of time, would not have the effect of the parties becoming subject to the provisions of the HM Act. The HM Act not having been extended to the State of Goa as on the date of their marriage, (26.12.2002) the said Act and the provisions thereunder would not apply.

26. The reasoning of the Family Court that in terms of Article 5 of the Law of Divorce, 1910, in force in the territories of Goa, Daman, and Diu, does provide that a suit for divorce shall be instituted either in the Court of domicile or in the Court having jurisdiction over the place where the plaintiff has his or her residency would enable the respondent to institute the petition for divorce at Belgaum is clearly a misinterpretation of the legal position. Chapter-2, Article 5 of the Law of divorce dealing with contested divorce, provides for grounds and procedure of a contested divorce. Article 5 in particular, reads as follows:

A suit for divorce shall be instituted either in the Court of domicile or in the Court having jurisdiction over the place where the plaintiff has his residence; but should the plaintiff reside in a foreign country, the respective suit shall be instituted in the Court of Division of Lisbon
27. From a reading of this provision, it would follow that a suit for divorce by parties governed by the Portuguese Family Law within the State of Goa can file tire same in the Court of domicile within Goa or in the Court having jurisdiction over the place where the. plaintiff resides (also within the State of Goa) It cannot be construed that a plaintiff who is residing outside the State of Goa could also file a suit or petition for divorce without the State of Goa, as in the present case, in a place where he or she is residing, outside Goa, The Courts, in the rest of India, would have no jurisdiction to entertain a suit (petition) under the Provisions of the Portuguese Family Law pertaining to divorce.

28. On the question whether there can be a domicile apart from Indian domicile, in reaped of persons who are Indian citizens, the observations of the Apex Court, in D.P. Joshi's case supra is relevant. The Apex Court has held that domicile has reference to the system of law by which a person is governed. The assumption insofar as the domicile of a country is that the same system of law prevails all over that country. But it might well happen that laws relating to succession and marriage might not he the same all over the country and different areas in the state might have different laws in respect of those matters. In that case, each area having, a distinct set of laws would itself be regarded as is country for the purpose of domicile.

(emphasis supplied)

29. The reasoning of the Division Bench of the Bombay High Court at Goa in. Monica Veriato, supra, is also relevant. The Court was applying the principles of English Private International Law as well as the views expressed by the Apex Court in this regard In the said, case, it is to be seen that a marriage between the parties was solemnised under the Special Marriage Act, 1954, at Mumbai mid thereafter, the parties having been domiciled at Goa, a question having arisen as to the law applicable in the State of Goa, it was held that since the parties were domiciled at Goa, the Special Marriage Act, 1954 would not apply and that the marriage solemnised at Mumbai can be deemed to be a marriage in a foreign country arid that die proceedings for divorce would necessarily have to be as per the law enforced in the State of Goa. By the same token of reasoning, it may be said that the respondent's petition, for divorce, even if it is construed as one being under the Portuguese Civil Law, would be akin to the suit being instituted in a foreign country, By virtue of the very Article indicating that if the plaintiff is residing in a foreign country, (though for all purposes the State of Karnataka is not a foreign country via-a-vis the State of Goa) the law as applicable would indicate that the suit can only be instituted in the Court of domicile, Since the respondent does not reside within the State of Goa, as she is presently residing at Belgaum, it would follow that alternatively, her suit will have to be instituted in the Court of Division at Lisbon Since this would create a practical difficulty and. an expensive one, it would be more appropriate if the respondent were to institute the suit in the place of domicile within the State of Goa., Though the respondent is now living at Belgaum, on the premise that if there was a possibility of reconciliation, her domicile would be that of the petitioner at Goa, it can safely be said that a suit by the respondent would lie in the State of Goa. in terms of Article 5 before the Court of domicile.

30. Tine further reasoning of the Family Court that the parties are Hindus by religion and since their marriage has been performed according to the Hindu customary rites and that it would be governed by the Hindu law, is incorrect for reasons as already stated.

31. The further opinion of the Family Court that in terms of Section 7 of the HM Ant, the Act would be applicable to citizens of India domiciled in territories to which the HM Act extends and hence the Family Court would have jurisdiction, is also incorrect, since the HM Act does not extend to the State of Goa.

32. In view of this, it can be said that the Portuguese Family Law would apply to the parties and the Court having jurisdiction would be the Court of domicile, within the State of Goa.

33. Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed.

34. In the result, the impugned order at Annexure-G is quashed Die Family Court, Belgaum, is directed to return the Matrimonial case, in M.C. No. 75/2006, to the respondent to be presented before the Court having jurisdiction.

35. All contentions as between the parties on merits of the matrimonial dispute other than as are answered hereinabove, tare left open.
================================================================================


================================================================================
CASE 22:
[Cites 15, Cited by 6]
Central Information Commission
Mrdr Dheeraj Kapoor vs Directorate Of Health And Family ... on 31 October, 2014
                                                         

             CENTRAL INFORMATION COMMISSION
                (Room No.315, B­Wing, August Kranti Bhawan, Bhikaji Cama Place, New Delhi 110 066)



                     File No.CIC/SA/A/2014/000494
                     



  Appellant                                      :          Dr.Dheeraj Kapoor

  Respondent                          :          Directorate of Health Services
                                      GNCTD, Delhi


  Date of hearing                                :          17­10­2014


  Date of decision                               :          31­10­2014


   Information Commissioner :                    Prof. M. Sridhar Acharyulu
                                                            (Madabhushi Sridhar)
   Referred Sections                  :          Sections 3, 19(3) of the RTI
                                      Act
  Result                              :          Appeal  allowed/
                                                 Disposed of



     The appellant is represented by Mr. S.C.Kapoor.  The Public Authority is represented 

by Dr. Beena Khurana and Mr. Harish Kumar, Directorate of Health Services, GNCTD, 

Delhi. Third party Dr Chetna Kapoor was also present.   

FACTS:
2.    The appellant through his RTI application dated sought information of Dr Chetna Kapoor  who is currently posted in DGHS dispensary Viz 

i) Detail  of Salary  : w.e.f date of  joining i.e 07/01/2002 to 31/07/2013. Detail Should include :

                 a.                                                           Basic Pay

                 b.                                                           Non Practise allowance

                 c.                                                           Grade Pay

                 d.                                                           Dearness allowance

                 e.                                                           House Rent allowance

                 f.                                                           Academic/annual allowance

   g. Transport allowance (Taxable/non Taxable)

h. Deductions : UTEGIS I, UTEGIS S, DGHS, GPF, Income Tax deduction, Education Cess  etc.

ii) Detail   of   residential   adress   as  mentioned in Service Book w.e.f date of joining

iii) Detail   of   rent   reciepts   against  HRA, for income tax exemption against HRA if any.


3.   PIO replied on 18­11­2013. Being unsatisfied with the information  provided, the appellant  preferred   First   Appeal   on   17­12­2013.     Claiming   non­satisfaction   over   the     information  provided, the appellant has approached the Commission in Second Appeal.        Decision:


4.    Both the parties made their submissions.  The appellant is represented by his father and  mother.  The Commission observes that except the information that is to be furnished under  Section  4(1)(b)   of   the  RTI   Act,   the  rest   of   the  information  pertaining  to  Public   Servant   is  generally   treated   as   'third   party'   information,   which   is   to   be   provided   after   hearing   the  objections from the third party and giving the opportunity to the third party, to appeal against  the decision to give the 'third party' information to the RTI applicant.  

5.   Before going into the question as to whether the information disclosed by the respondent  authority of the third party who is a Public servant is valid or not, it is necessary to look into the  relevant law, Section 8(1)(j) of the RTI Act:


"(j)   information   which   relates   to   personal   information   the   disclosure   of   which   has   no   relationship to any public activity or interest, or which would cause unwarranted invasion   of the privacy of the individual unless the Central Public Information Officer or the State   Public Information Officer or the appellate authority, as the case may be, is satisfied that   the larger public interest justifies the disclosure of such information: 
Provided that the information which cannot be denied to the Parliament or a  State Legislature shall not be denied to any person."
6.    Central Information Commission in number of its decisions has not allowed disclosure of  income tax returns, PAN numbers, details filed for tax determination, bank accounts, source of  funds, partnership details, plan to run dealership etc.  However any activity of a public servant  in  his  official capacity has to be  disclosed.  Service  matters  like  appointment, suspension,  revocation of  suspension,  postings,  calculation of  pension,  details  of  leave,  tour,  etc were  allowed  to be disclosed. However  entire  service  book  of a  particular  employee cannot be  disclosed as that matter between employee and employer. Employee can seek it and get it, but  for   others   it   is   third   party   information,   Hon'ble   Supreme   Court   of   India   in  Girish Ramchandra Deshpande Vs. Central Information Commissioner & Ors. [Special  Leave Petition (Civil) No. 27734 of 2012] dated 3 October 2012 had observed as follows :

"13.   ....  The   performance   of   an   employee/officer   in   an   organization   is  primarily a matter between the employee and the employer and normally  those   aspects   are   governed   by   the   service   rules   which   fall   under   the  expression   "personal   information",   the   disclosure   of   which   has   no  relationship to any public activity or public interest. On the other hand, the  disclosure of which would cause unwarranted invasion of privacy of that  individual.  ...  but the petitioner cannot claim those details as a matter of  right. ....The details disclosed by a person in his income tax returns are "personal  information"
Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in R. K Jain Vs Union of India (UOI) and Anr. [ SLP (C) No. 22609  of 2012] with regard to third party information made similar observations regarding personal information  with reference to third party under Section 8(1)(j). 

Hon'ble Delhi High Court in the case of Vijay Prakash Vs Union of India [W.P. (C) 803/2009]  observed:


"20. .... a distinction must be made between "official" information inherent to the position  and those that are not, and therefore affect only his/her private life. This balancing task  appears to be easy; but is in practice, not so, having regard to the dynamics inherent in  the   conflict.   Though   it   may  be   justifiably  stated   that   protection   of   the  public  servant's  private or personal details as an individual, is necessary, provided that such protection  does not  prevent  due  accountability,  there  is  a  powerful counter  argument  that  public  servants  must  effectively  waive the right to privacy in favour of transparency.  Thus, if  public access to the personal details such as identity particulars of public servants, i.e.  details such as their dates of birth, personal identification numbers, or other personal  information furnished to public agencies, is requested, the balancing exercise, necessarily  dependant   and   evolving   on   case   by   case   basis   may   take   into   account   the   following  relevant considerations, i.e. 
i) whether the information is deemed to comprise the individual's private  details, unrelated to his position in the organization, and, 
ii)   whether   the   disclosure   of   the   personal   information   is   with   the   aim   of   providing  knowledge   of   the   proper   performance   of   the   duties  and   tasks   assigned   to   the   public  servant in any specific case; 
iii) whether the disclosure will furnish any information required to establish accountability  or transparency in the use of public resources.
... 

The   Commission   in  Ms.   Manisha   Vs.   Integrated   Headquarter   of   Army  (MOD) [CIC/WB/A/2007/001636­SM] with regard to Voluntary disclosure of Salary details Under Sec 4 (1)

(b)(X) had observed as follows :


"4. Section 4(1) (b) (x) reads as follows: 
"the monthly remuneration received by each of its officers and employees, including the  system of compensation as provided in its regulations". 
5. It is evident from the above that the details of remuneration etc., of an employee were  to be disclosed by the Public Authority as a part of suo­motu disclosure under Section  4(1) (b) of the RTI Act. In other words, information in respect of the salary and other  remunerations of an employee are not privileged information and will have to be  placed in the public domain.  If the Public Authority concerned has not done so yet, it  must immediately place such details in the public domain. We direct the CPIO and the  Appellate Authority to provide the information in regard to monthly remuneration received  by Capt. Naresh Kundu (DE­83MCEME) at the time of providing the information within 10  working days from the receipt of this order. Other details sought by the Appellant need not  be provided as it is not mandated under the above section of the Act." The Delhi High Court in Arvind Kejriwal v. Central Public Information Officer [AIR 2010 Del  216]  considered Section 11 of the RTI Act. The Court held that once the information seeker is  provided information relating to a third party, it is no longer in the private domain. Such information  seeker can then disclose in turn such information to the whole World. Therefore, for providing the  information the procedure outlined under Section 11(1) cannot be dispensed with.  Karnataka High Court in  HE Rajasekharappa v SPIO  [AIR 2009 Kar. 8]  decided on 1st July  2008 by Justice K Bhakthavatsala held that citizen had no right to information about personal  information of the public servant as section 2(f) did not encompass the 'personal information'. 

7.       In this case, the Commission holds that the information about the details of deductions,  address etc of Dr Chetna Kapoor is her personal information the 'third party' and the PIO has to  necessarily follow the procedure under Section 11(1). 


8.       Amount of Salary and the details of pay­scale of public servant can be part of voluntarily  disclosable information under Section 4(1)(b), whereas deductions,  personal loans, details of net  or  gross salary  paid  for a  particular  month, or  seeking  a salary  slip  (payment  voucher)    and  residential   addresses   are   not   disclosable,   unless   larger   public   interest   is   involved.   If   an   RTI  Application is filed for that information, the larger public interest has to be examined by the PIOs,  Appellate Authorities and the Commission. 


9.    Before deciding the nature of information sought in this case, one more complication need to  be addressed, i.e., right of citizen seeking wife's information from public authority, who employed  wife.   The issue is privacy between spouses. The RTI Act did not give any specific or special  exemption to share personal information with the spouses.  As far as RTI Act is concerned there is  no difference between the spouse and citizen. Right to privacy is an individual right and within the  couple, each individual can claim or give up that right. Especially when spouses are entangled in  legal disputes such as marital claims or cruelty charges, the privacy of individual spouse assumes  importance in the context of demand for information.  When the spouse does not consent to give  information, the courts of law have to examine the need and then direct the other party to disclose  if justified. For instance in maintenance petition by one spouse against the other, the court of law  has to examine the claims, income and expenditure of both the spouses and direct accordingly in  order to decide the issue and amount of maintenance. 


10.         The   information   about   salary   amount   of   Dr.   Chetna   Kapur,   an   employee   of   DGHS  dispensary, the third party in this case, is in public domain and can be accessed by any person  from the website of the public authority which is supposed to disclose under Section 4(1)(b) or  through  an  RTI   Application  under  Section  3.   Such  information  cannot   be  denied  even  to  her  husband.     Whether   it   is   for   maintenance   or   for   any   other   purpose,   such   information   can   be  disclosed without seeking reasons for disclosure. There is no privacy pertaining to the information  about salary or pay scale of public servant, which is fixed by a wage board after open hearings  and   paid   by   the   state.   There   is   nothing   confidential   about   it.   Such   information   cannot   be  considered as held in any fiduciary capacity because it is between employer and employee. 

11.         This   Commission   in   its   earlier   order  (Jyoti   Seherawat   Vs.   Home   (General)  Dept., GNCTD, File No.CIC/AD/A/2012/003341SA) explained the right to information  of salary of spouse as a citizen and culled out following points. 


a) The salary paid to the public servant by the public authority is sourced from the tax paid by the  people   in   general.  The   scale  of  salary is  also   fixed  by  the  Public  Authority  based   on  certain  reasonable   fixation   in   an   open   exercise   by   Pay   Revision   Commissions   which   later   would   be  generally   approved   by   the   Government,   which   is   the   representative   of   the   people.   Thus   the  information belongs to public and they have a right to access to it as per RTI Act. It has to be  disclosed under Section 4 voluntarily by the Public Authority and if a member of public seeks it, it  cannot be denied. 

 

b)       The information about salary of employee/officer of the same Public Authority cannot be  considered as 'third party information'.  The employee of the public authority is part of that public  authority and hence he is not the third party. Hence there is no need to obtain the consent of the  particular employee for disclosure of that information as provided under the RTI Act, unless it falls  under   any   exception.   It   may   be   recalled   that   even   in   case   of   third   party   information,   if   the  Commission considers the public interest demands, such information can be given in spite of  refusal   by  the   third   party.   Public  Authorities  cannot   reject   such   RTI   applications  about   salary  under the pretext of third party information.

c) As per the provisions of various personal laws applicable to people of different religions, the  husband as an earning member of family has a legal duty to maintain the wife and children.  It is  an undisputed fact that the dependents such as wives and children can seek a direction from the  Courts  of   Justice.   Even  after  the  divorce,  the  family  law  ordains that  Husband   has  a  duty to  provide for necessary maintenance of the wife and children. Section 125 of Criminal Procedure  Code   mandated   that   husband   has   a   general   duty   to   maintain   wife   and   children.   The   wife's  entitlement to know the salary particulars of her husband gets further fortified by all the above  legal provisions.

 
d) Especially when the wife is seeking the salary particulars of the Husband, from the public  authority where he is working as public servant, it is the duty of the public authority to render  required assistance by providing necessary information to her to secure justice. Denial of such  information to wife is thus, highly unreasonable, not justified and it will also amount to breach of  legal obligation. 

 
e) The maintenance of spouse and children of the family is the legal responsibility of the earning  member  of   the   family.  Depending   upon   the  situation  a   husband   if   dependent  or  incapable   of  earning might seek similar information about the salary of the wife, if she is an employee of the  public authority. 

 

12.      All that information about salary, such as DA, HRA, pension etc of public servants as  available   in   public   domain   shall   be   made   available   to   seekers   under   RTI   Act   also.   The  information about salary which is not part of 'scale', is not public information. The information  for instance, about deduction of installment for personal loan, payments or savings made by  public servant, expenditure details etc is his personal information. As a spouse whether he/she  wants to give that private information to the other spouse or not is personal discretion of the  spouse. Thus it becomes third party information as far as the spouse (husband in this case) is  concerned. In his capacity as a citizen, the appellant is entitled to know the salary particulars  of his wife (third party here). Similarly as a citizen has no right to know the private particulars  of salary, he can have information about salary amount but not the details of deductions etc of  salary of his wife. The Commission is not discussing rights and duties of spouses here, it has  to   decide   what   information   to   be   disclosed   among   citizens   who   happens   to  be   spouses.  Sometimes spouse's interest in securing her\his right might be considered as public interest. A  citizen, even if a spouse, has no right to information about deductions and expenditure from  salary, as that would amount to personal information unless it is in larger public interest. 

13.      In the present case, the information sought about  Dr. Chetna Kapoor who is currently  posted   in   DGHS   dispensary   is:   Detail   of   Salary   :   w.e.f   date   of   joining   i.e   07/01/2002   to  31/07/2013   including   Basic   Pay,   Non   Practise   allowance,   Grade   Pay,Dearness   allowance,  House   Rent   allowance,   Academic/annual   allowance,   Transport   allowance   (Taxable/non  Taxable)   and  Education  Cess.   All   this   information  is   in  public   domain  and  thus   it   can  be  disclosed under S. 4(1)(b) and to which the appellant can also have access to. 

14.    The appellant had further sought information as to deductions : UTEGIS I, UTEGIS S,  DGHS, GPF, Income Tax deduction, etc., Details of residential adress as mentioned in Service  Book  w.e.f  date  of   joining,  Detail  of   rent   reciepts  against   HRA,  for   income  tax   exemption  against HRA if any. All these details about service of public servant is not in public domain.  This information has no relation to public acitviity. Disclosure of this information will result in  unwarranted invasion of privacy, which is prohibited by Section 8(1)(j). These details are not  part of 'salary' information in public domain. Salary being given is in public domain, spending  of  it is personal  information. Disclosure  of kind of  expenditure by public servant could be  unwarranted  invasion  of   privacy.     Section  8(1)(j)   along  with  proviso  of   public   interest   and  Section 11 will operate. 

Third party information: PIO's Duty

15.    Thus it is third party information necessitating PIO to invoke procedure under Section 11.  The PIO has a responsibility to check up whether Dr. Chetna Kapur would like to share or not  such information. In this case Dr. Chetna Kapur refused to share the same with her husband  with whom she is  locked in  marital  disputes in courts  of law. In  fact, giving details about  deduction will be useful for her as that shows her expenditure which is relevant in hearing of  maintenance petition. However it is left to her personal discretion to agree or refuse. 

16.       The respondent sought her consent, which she refused. The First Appellate Authority  held the information as not confidential and ordered PIO to give such information to appellant.  The First Appellate Authority has not given any reasons for that conclusion. It was not FAA  case that information sought was personal but there existed larger public interest and hence  the information shall be given. The order does not even mention these aspects. He has held  that   information   regarding   deductions   :   UTEGIS   I,   UTEGIS   S,   DGHS,   GPF,   Income   Tax  deduction, etc., and detail of residential adress as mentioned in Service Book w.e.f date of  joining, detail of rent reciepts against HRA, for income tax exemption against HRA if any, was  not confidential in a short, three line order.  This order is totally against the letter and spirit of  RTI Act. 


17.    Initially the PIO has rightly refused to give above information considering it as information  of 'third party'. The PIO pursued procedure under Section 11 and sought the opinion of third  party Dr Chetna Kapoor, who  refused to give consent, but after FAA ordered disclosure the  PIO did not initiate process to inform and obtain opinion of third party. Dr Chetna Kapoor also  was not informed abour her right to second appeal to the Commission. The PIO complied with  the order of First Appellate Authority which was against RTI Act and gave every information  sought. In fact there is no reason or ground left for second appeal as the illegal order of FAA  was fully complied with. Yet the appellant reached the Commission saying some of the sheets  given in answer were not legible. 


18.       The Commission finds the order of FAA as illegal because; a. he has not given any  reason, b. his direction was against the provisions of RTI Act, c.  it would violate the right to  privacy of Dr. Chetna Kapur. If the information sought is essential for maintenance and for  deciding other petitions filed by husband, the appropriate court of law which is hearing that  case would be proper authority to direct the disclosure or otherwise of the information.  The  Commission holds that the information about the salay and pay scale would serve the interest  and purpose of maintenance rights of the spouses. It was not fair and proper for the appellant  to come in second appeal even after he got information needed for pursuing his right against  his wife. 


19.    In this case, the Third Party refused to give her consent and the PIO had furnished the  third party information to the appellant, though, in compliance of the FAA's illegal order, without  giving the opportunity to the third party to prevent it by going in 2nd appeal.  The Commission  also observes that the FAA did not give any reasoned order overriding   the requirement of  consent of the Third Party in this case without saying anything on the public interest issue.  The Commission, therefore, sets aside the order of FAA for reasons explained above.   The  Commission advises the PIOs of public authorities not to deny the right of second appeal of  the public servants such as Dr. Chetna Kapur, and not to disclose the personal information  without allowing them to exhaust that right of appeal by the affected party, especially after First  Appellate Authority's order, which was illegal.


20.       The Commission cautions the PIO in this case to be careful in future in disclosing  personal   information   of   the   'third   party'     and   should   ensure   that   the   third   party   is   given  complete opportunity as prescribed by law even after the first appeal.  

21.    The Third Party, Dr. Chetna Kapoor who is present in the hearing, requested not to share  her   Service  Book  and  other   personal   information  including  her   residential   address   at   any  stage  of   her   service.     The  Commission  also  observes   that  the  PIO  had  already  supplied  wrongfully, copies of Pay Book Register (PBR), which was supposed to be private information  of the third party.  The Commission directs the PIO not to supply any such documents as they  squarely fall  under  private information of  the  third party.    Regarding  the other  information  sought by the appellant under 2nd appeal, the Commission observes that such information  cannot be given as it was personal information of third party, who has refused to consent for  the same.   There is also no larger public interest involved in this regard. Hence no further  information  be  given  to  the  appellant,  other  than  what  is   already  given  by  the  PIO.    The  Commission closes the appeal accordingly.     


(M. Sridhar Acharyulu) Information Commissioner Authenticated true copy  (Babu Lal) Deputy Registrar Address of the parties:


1. The CPIO under RTI, Government of NCT of Delhi DIRECTORATE OF HEALTH SERVICES, O/o Chief District Medical Officer, West District, Major Ashwani Kanv Delhi Govt. Dispensay Building, Opposite to Radha Krishna Mandir,  A­2, Paschim Vihar, NEW DELHI­110063
2. Dr. Dheeraj Kapoor,  Assistant Professor of Anaesthesia & Intensive Care Govt. Medical College & Hospital, Chandigarh Department of Anaesthesia & Intensive Care Level­V, B­Wing, GMCH,  Sector­32, CHANDIGARH­160030. 
================================================================================


================================================================================
CASE 23:
[Cites 16, Cited by 2]
Madras High Court
M.Laxman vs L.Annapurani on 5 June, 2018
Author: M.V.Muralidaran
Bench: C.T.Selvam, M.V.Muralidaran
        

 


IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS

Reserved on : 08.12.2017

Pronounced on :   05.06.2018

CORAM:

THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE C.T.SELVAM
AND
THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE M.V.MURALIDARAN

C.M.A.Nos.522 and 523 of 2009 and
M.P.No.1 of 2009 and
Caveat No.388 of 2009


M.Laxman				.. Appellant/Petitioner in both the CMAs

Vs.


L.Annapurani			.. Respondent/Respondent in both the CMAs

Common Prayer:- Civil Miscellaneous Appeals filed under Section 19 of the Family Courts Act 1984, against the decreetal order and fair order made by the learned Principal Judge, Family Court, Chennai in O.P.Nos.2418 and 958 of 2003 dated 30.12.2008 and pray for setting aside the same.

		(In both the CMAs)
		For Appellant 	: Mrs.Hema Sampath, Senior Counsel
					   for M/s.P.V.Rajeswari

		For Respondent	: Mr.Sivakami Shanmugam Pillai
***



COMMON JUDGMENT

[Judgment of the Court was delivered by M.V.MURALIDARAN,J.] These two Civil Miscellaneous Appeals are filed as against the Common Order dated 30.12.2008 passed in F.C.O.P.Nos.958 of 2003 and 2418 of 2003 by the Learned Principal Family Court Judge, at Chennai.

2.The F.C.O.P.No.958 of 2003 is filed by the husband, who is the Appellant herein as against his wife who is the respondent herein for the Relief of dissolution of marriage under Section 13(1)(ia) and 13(1)(iii) of the Hindu Marriage Act. Further, the F.C.O.P.No.2418 of 2003 was filed by the Respondent/wife for the restitution of her marital life and for custody of children under Sections 9 and 26 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955.

3.As the parties in the aforesaid two cases are one and the same, the Learned Principal Family Court, Chennai, jointly tried the matter based on the Joint memo filed by the parties concerned. Further, in the course of the joint trial, evidence was recorded in F.C.O.P.No.958 of 2003, However, the Petitioner in F.C.O.P.No. 958 of 2003 was examined as PW1 and Exs.P1 to P19 were marked. At the same time the Respondent in the F.C.O.P.No.958 of 2003 was examined as RW-1 and through her Exs.R1 to R54 were marked.

4.Considering the Petition filed by the parties concerned and also the counter affidavit filed by the parties the Learned Trial Court Judge framed the following points for consideration, they are:

1. Whether the Respondent/Wife has treated the petitioner with cruelty?
2. Whether the Respondent /Wife suffering from any mental disorder, so that the Petitioner/Husband cannot be expected to live with Respondent/ Wife?
3. Whether the Petitioner/Husband has got reasonable excuse for withdrawal from society of his wife?
4. Whether Petitioner/Husband is entitled to divorce as prayed for?
5. Whether Respondent/Wife is entitled to the relief of restitution of her conjugal rights as prayed for?
6. To what other relief?
5.After considering all the materials and evidence, the Learned Trial Court Judge answered Point Nos.1, 2 and 3 in favour of the Respondent/Wife. Further, Point No.4 was also answered against the Appellant/Husband and Point No.5 was ordered in favour of the Respondent/Wife and finally the application for divorce in F.C.O.P.No. 958 of 2003 was dismissed and the F.C.O.P.No.1418 of 2003 was allowed.

6.Felling aggrieved over the order passed in the aforesaid F.C.O.P.s, the Husband has preferred these two Civil Miscellaneous Appeals. Since the issue involved in these two Civil Miscellaneous Appeal is related with each other, it has been jointly heard on consent and the common order is passed.

7.The case of the Appellant is that the Court below has erred in disbelieving the evidence of PW1 and failed to consider the oral evidence of the Appellant. Hence, he prays this Court to allow the Civil Miscellaneous Appeal.

8.Per contra, the case of the Respondent/Wife according to the learned counsel for the wife is that the finding of the Learned Trial Judge need not be interfered as it is supported by cogent evidence and the alleged cruelty was not proved by the appellant. So, he prays for the dismissal of the appeals.

9.We heard Mrs.Hema Sampath, learned Senior Counsel for M/s.P.V.Rajeswari, learned counsel for the appellant and M/s.Sivakami Shanmugam Pillai, learned counsel for the respondent in both the Civil Miscellaneous Appeals and all the records available are perused.

10. For the sake of convenience, the parties are hereby called as their capacity having in F.C.O.P.No.958 of 2003 before the trial Court.

11.It is the case that the husband filed a petition for divorce on the ground of cruelty and wife has filed a petition for restitution of conjugal rights. The date of marriage and the birth of the children are admitted. It is seen from the records that subsequent to the marriage the spouses went to honeymoon trip to foreign country during March, 1990. At the same time even after a short span of marriage life some differences were arisen, and according to the Appellant / Husband, the Respondent/ Wife insisted for living separately. So, the place of residence was shifted from Chennai to Madurai. But even after the shifting of the residence, under the pretext of suspicion, the petitioner was ill treated and he was not treated as human being by the respondent. Even after the birth of two children, the Respondent did not mend her character, but her cruel attitude attained extreme level which was intolerable. Further in an occasion, the petitioner was physically prevented even to attend the betrothal, marriage function of his own brother. Only at the intervention of the father of the Respondent, the Petitioner was allowed to participate in those functions. Further, after the marriage of the brother of the Petitioner, when he came to the resident of the Petitioner along with his newly wedded wife for a dinner, the respondent refused to invite them and thereby the attitude of the Respondent was to be intolerable in Madurai. Apart from that the children were also affected due to the unpredictable attitude of the respondent. So, the Petitioner was constrained to shift his residence from Madurai to Neelangarai, Chennai in January, 1995.

12.Even thereafter the Respondent did not mend her behavior, so again the Petitioner shifted the residence to Barathidhasan Salai, Chennai during 1995 itself. At the same time the change of residence was also for the studies of the children. The further submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner would be that the Respondent often quarreled with the Petitioner to purchase property in the name of the Respondent accordingly, properties were purchased in her name in Kodaikanal and Tirunelveli and the arrangement was constrained to be made due to the suicidal threat of the Respondent. In addition to that the Petitioner also purchased a property in Padapai Village, Madurai District jointly in the name of the Petitioner and Respondent. Moreover, the Petitioner also purchased nearly 170 sovereign of gold jewels and diamond jewels worth about Rs.25 lakhs for the respondent. At the same time, the Respondent used to make unnecessary phone calls to the office of the petitioner in Chennai and Madurai and made imputations and wild allegations against the women staffs in the office. In addition to that the Respondent used to spread allegation against the Petitioner with an intention to degrade the moral character of the Appellant.

13.The Learned Counsel for the Appellant would further submit that on 10.10.2000 the respondent again consumed a sleeping tablets and was taken to a Hospital at Alwarpet where a Doctor namely Jeyalakshmi gave treatment to the Respondent by admitting her as in-patient for two days. Thereafter she was taken to Madurai by her parents by giving assurance to the Petitioner that they would advice her properly. Instead, shockingly and abruptly, the Respondent lodged a complaint before the All Woman Police Station, Madurai. But on the intervention of the elders of the family members, the said complaint was withdrawn.

14.Apart from that from 2000 onwards the Respondent denied conjugal relationship and not even allowed the petitioner even to interact with his family members. Further, in the early 2001, the Respondent again attempted to commit suicide by consumed sleeping pills, this time also the Respondent was taken to a Hospital and her life was secured. However, in November, 2002 when the Appellant left to Singapore as business trip, the Respondent spread wild allegations among the friends and relatives as if the petitioner took a lady staff along with him to Singapore. This unwarranted act of the respondent left a scar in the mind of the petitioner. Earlier, in the year, 1999 a burn injury was inflicted upon the petitioner on his left wrist by the Respondent through a heated iron rod. Apart from that the Respondent also threatened the petitioner that she would commit suicide by leaving a suicidal note implicating the petitioner, so having left with no other option the petitioner caused a legal notice informing the Respondent not to indulge with in any illegal Acts. Though the said notice was received, the respondent instead of properly replied the notice, in an uncivilized manner abused the father of the Petitioner in the presence of her relatives and unexpectedly the Respondent made a gruesome allegation as if the father of the Appellant sexually tried to abuse the daughter of the Appellant and left the matrimonial home by challenging the Appellant. As the respondent made uncivilized and unexpected allegation against the father of the Appellant, his health condition was suddenly collapsed and on 08.03.2003 he died, but even in the funeral rites, the Respondent did not attend and all these act of the Respondent caused physical and mental cruelty in the matrimonial life of the petitioner which made him to feel that his marital relationship with the Respondent has completely and irretrievably broken down and he has filed the petition for divorce on the ground of cruelty.

15.To support the case, the petitioner was examined himself as PW1 and marked Exs.P1 to P19. This Court has perused the oral evidence of the petitioner and the exhibits marked on the side of the appellant. The learned senior counsel for the petitioner has contended that the total appreciation of the evidence of the petitioner has supported his case, and prays for the relief sought for may be granted.

16.However, the appreciation of the evidence let in by either side would show that wealth alone will not construct the matrimonial life, but it must be an intuition and will be on a spontaneous feel based on love. The bond between the husband and wife could not be based on any mutual expectation except love, security and togetherness. In the arranged marriage, the couples started to understand the needs of each other subsequent to the marriage. At the same time it was the system in the Hindu marriage, even in all other religion too that there will be a gap between the betrothal and marriage and this could provide a chance to facilitate the couples to share their views and ideas even prior to the marriage for better understanding. Because, as for as in our country, conventionally, the marriage is a life time bond between a man and woman not only physical, but mentally too. In the marital life the spouses are expected each other to satisfy and get satisfied the need of each other with individual self respect. Almost they visualize the surrounding with two eyes alone though they are heaving each two. The healthy relationship between the husband and wife would definitely create a healthy family and same would generate a healthy citizen to the nation. In our past experience up to this extent we understand the marital relationship of a husband and wife.

17.Now, let us appraise the cross examination of the petitioner by the respondent that would show that several allegations made in the petition are not denied by way of suggestion. Apart from that the Respondent was particular in the business affairs of the petitioner, at the same time it is to be noted that though the Respondent has filed petition for restitution of conjugal relationship, no suggestion was put forth whether she was ready to resume the marital relationship with the petitioner. This would have a bearing on the case of the Respondent.

18.Let us now take up the case of the Respondent for appreciation. The Respondent has denied all the averments of the petition of the petitioner and stoutly denied that she had quarrelsome attitude and shown disregard towards the petitioner and his family members. The honeymoon trip was admitted, however, it is stated that during the honeymoon trip the brother-in-law of the petitioner also accompanied, but during the cross examination the allegation was denied by the petitioner but this aspect was not proved by the Respondent as to whether the brother-in-law of the Appellant had accompany with the spouse to Singapore. However, it is stated by the Respondent that only because of the arrangement of the father of the petitioner, the spouses were sent to Madurai to look after the Madurai branch, but not on the compulsion of the Respondent as alleged by the petitioner. Further, it is stated that the Respondent never prevented the Appellant to attend the betrothal and marriage of his brother. The reason behind that is that the brother of the Petitioner fall in love with the cousin of the Respondent but, the parents of the petitioner had hesitation to give consent to the brother of the petitioner to marry the cousin of the respondent. But their marriage was solemnized only after compulsion on the said bride and thereafter, the parents of the petitioner agreed for marriage. As the petitioner wanted to satisfy his mother, he did not want to attend the function, but his father advised him to attend and accordingly the ceremonies were solemnized.

19.Further, all other allegations leveled against the Respondent are stoutly denied and according to the learned counsel for the Respondent, the petitioner has not proved any of the allegations made against the respondent. It is specifically noted in the counter affidavit that on 10.12.2002 the Petitioner had his morning tiffin and left for work at about 09.30 a.m., thereafter all of a sudden at about 10.30. a.m., the Petitioner called the Respondent and asked her to leave the matrimonial home with instructions that as per the advice of the astrologers; it was the tough time for the Petitioner and the Respondent. So, the petitioner instructed the respondent to leave the matrimonial home. However, the respondent was not ready to leave from the matrimonial home and denied. Since the instructions given by the Petitioner were not followed by the Respondent, the Petitioner did not return back to home. In this regard as the Petitioner had not come back to the home continuously for about four days, the Respondent was constrained to seek the assistance of her father-in-law, but it was ended in vain and on the compulsion of the Petitioner alone the Respondent left the Matrimonial home. Further, the children were also left with the husband and during the Christmas vacation the children were sent to Madurai and they stayed along with the Respondent. After the completion of the Christmas vacation, the father of the Petitioner instructed the Respondent to send back the children alone to Chennai though the Respondent tried to go to the matrimonial home, it was not properly responded. However, without providing any breathing time the Petitioner caused the legal notice. Moreover, when the notice issued by the Petitioner, the respondent at that time was staying at a Thapovanam in Vilupuram District. However, when she came to know about the legal notice sent by the Petitioner, immediately, she came down to Chennai on 14.02.2003 along with her family members.

20.Unfortunately, when the respondent reached the home, the Petitioner refused even to talk with the Respondent and the children were not in the home. However, the Petitioner informed through some other relatives of the respondent that the children would be sent to Madurai immediately after the exams are over. Further, it was also assured that the Petitioner will come and take back the respondent to the home at the earliest. At the same time, the Respondent went to the school and met the children. Apart from that several other factors were also given in the counter affidavit and the learned counsel for the Respondent would submit that the Respondent also file the petition for Restitution of Conjugal right and she is all along ready to live with the Petitioner. According to the Learned Counsel for the Respondent that the Respondent having vital evidence to show that she never think about separation, but all along was sincerely trying to join with the Petitioner. Moreover, only because of the intentional attitude of the Petitioner she has been deserted without any valid reason. The counsel for the Respondent has drawn the attention of this Court that the Petitioner though made allegation in respect of the mental health of the Respondent, no evidence is produced about the mental health of the Respondent. This Court finds that the petition is filed by invoking the provision under Section 13(1)(iii) of Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 also. The said provision would read as follows:

Divorce  (1) (iii) Any marriage solemnized, whether before or after the commencement of this act, may on a petition presented by either the husband or the wife, be dissolved by a decree on the ground that the other party  (iii) has been incurably of unsound mind, or has been suffering continuously or intermittently from mental disorder of such a kind and to such an extent that the petitioner cannot reasonably be expected to live with the respondent.
21.That the learned counsel for the respondent has relied on the following judgment to support his contention that the alleged acts as stated by the petitioner would not amount to unsound mind and thereby he is not entitled the relief sought for.

22.In (2014) 1 Supreme Court cases 225, in the case of Kollam Chandra Sekhar Versus- Kollam Padma Latha it is held that A. Family and Personal Laws  Hindu Law  Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 - S. 13(1)(iii) Expln. and S. 9  Divorce on grounds of unsoundness of mind and mental disorder including schizophrenia  When may not be granted  Mere existence of mental disorder insufficient to justify dissolution of marriage  Need for existence of serious mental disorder  Further held, one spouse cannot simply abandon the other spouse because the latter is suffering from sickness -

In the instant case, medical report failed to support the case of appellant/ husband that respondent was suffering from serious case of schizophrenia  Rather, report indicated that although respondent was suffering from illness of schizophrenic type but did not show symptoms of psychotic illness, had responded well to treatment from acute phases and her symptoms were fairly under control with medication and further that if there was good compliance with treatment coupled with good family and social support, a schizophrenic patient could continue normal conjugal and marital relationship....

B. ....

C. Family and Personal Laws  Divorce  Welfare of child prime consideration ......

The High Court by the impugned judgment allowed the appeal filed by respondent wife holding that there was no positive evidence to show that the respondent suffered from schizophrenia, and even if she did suffer it was not of such seriousness as would attract Section 13(1)(iii), Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 for grant of divorce.

Hence, instant appeal by appellant husband.

The issue for consideration was whether the marriage between the parties can be dissolved by granting a decree of divorce on the basis of mere existence of one spouse's mental illness which includes schizophrenia under Section 13(1)(iii) of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955.

Dismissing the appeal, the Supreme Court Held:

The High Court relied on the evidence of RW2 Superintendent, Institute of Mental Health who had stated that schizophrenia can be put on a par with diseases like hypertension and diabetes, and by constant medication it can be controlled. Reliance was also placed on the testimony of PW 4, Professor and Head of Department of Psychiatry at NIMHANS, Bangalore who had deposed that there was no contra-indication in leading a normal conjugal life. The High Court has rightly examined the evidence on record and correctly found fault with the findings recorded by the trial court with regard to the ailment attributed to the respondent for seeking dissolution of marriage under the ground of unsound mind which is a non-existent fact. It was also justified in holding that a husband cannot simply abandon his wife because she is suffering from mental sickness. Section 13(1)(iii) of HMA, 1955 does not make a mere existence of a mental disorder of any degree sufficient in law to justify the dissolution of marriage.
.....
Under Hindu law, marriage is an institution, a meeting of two hearts and minds and is something that cannot be taken lightly. In the Vedic period, the sacredness of the marriage tie was repeatedly declared; the family ideal was decidedly high and it was often realised. Marriage is highly revered in India and we are a nation that prides itself on the strong foundation of our marriages, come hell or high water, rain or sunshine. Life is made up of good times and bad, and the bad times can bring with it terrible illnesses and extreme hardships. The partners in a marriage must weather these storms and embrace the sunshine with equanimity. Any person may have bad health, this is not their fault and most times, it is not within their control, as in the present case, the respondent was unwell and was taking treatment for the same. The illness had its fair share of problems. But, this cannot be a reason for the appellant to abandon her and seek dissolution of marriage after the child is born from their union. The welfare of the child must be the prime consideration for both the parties. (Paras 41 and 42)
41.Under Hindu law, marriage is an institution, a meeting of two hearts and minds and is something that cannot be taken lightly. In the Vedic period, the sacredness of the marriage tie was repeatedly declared; the family ideal was decidedly high and it was often realised. In Vedic Index I it is stated that the high value placed on the marriage is shown by the long and striking hymn. In Rig Veda, X, 85; be, thou, mother of heroic children, devoted to the Gods; be, thou, Queen in thy father-in-law's household. May all the Gods unite the hearts of us 'two into one', as stated in Justice Ranganath Misra's Mayne's Treatise on Hindu Law and Usage.
42.Marriage is highly revered in India and we are a nation that prides itself on the strong foundation of our marriages, come hell or high water, rain or sunshine. Life is made up of good times and bad, and the bad times can bring with it terrible illnesses and extreme hardships. The partners in a marriage must weather these storms and embrace the sunshine with equanimity. ......
43.In view of the foregoing reasons, we are of the opinion that the two parties in this case must reconcile and if the appellant so feels that the respondent is still suffering, then she must be given the right treatment. The respondent must stick to her treatment plan and make the best attempts to get better. It is not in the best interest of either the respondent or her daughter who is said to be of adolescent age for grant of a decree of dissolution of marriage as prayed for by the appellant. Hence, the appeal is liable to be dismissed.
44.Accordingly, we dismiss the appeal and uphold the judgment of the High Court in not granting a decree of divorce and allowing the petition for restitution of conjugal rights. Therefore, we grant a decree for restitution of conjugal rights under Section 9 of the Act in favour of the respondent.
23.In (2013) 9 Supreme Court Cases 1,Darshan Gupta -Vs-Radhika Gupta, it is held as follows:

Family and Personal Laws  Hindu Law  Hindu Marriage Act, 1955  Ss. 13(1)(i-a) & (iii)  Divorce  Grounds of cruelty and unsound mind/mental disorder of wife alleged by husband  Allegation if made out.
...No evidence to show wife's alleged intemperate/ aggressive/erratic behaviour such as shouting and screaming without provocation or cause, getting up at midnight and not allowing husband to sleep, etc. as alleged  Held, grounds under Ss.13(1)(i-a) & (iii) not made out  Hence, plea for divorce, rejected  Evidence Act, 1872, S.45.
B.Family and Personal Laws  Hindu Law  Hindu Marriage Act, 1955  S.13(1)  Divorce petition  Petitioner must approach court with clean hands  Grounds of divorce under S. 13(1) are based on matrimonial offence or fault theory  It is only commission of matrimonial offence by one spouse that entitles the other spouse to seek divorce  Hence if petitioner himself/herself is guilty or at fault, he/she would be disentitled to seek divorce  Held, petitioner husband was disentitled to seek divorce on alleged grounds as he himself was responsible therefor  Divorce  Bases for  Fault basis under Hindu Marriage Act, 1955.
... Even though as a result of therapeutic and neuropsychological rehabilitation measures she recovered to a considerable extent and was able to discharge her matrimonial obligations, the appellant husband filed a divorce petition in the Family Court under Sections 13(1)(i-a) and (iii) of the Hindu Marriage Act on the grounds that he had been subjected to cruelty on account of the intemperate behaviour of his wife and that his wife is of incurable unsound mind and suffers from such a mental disorder, that the appellant cannot be reasonably expected to live with her. It was inter alia submitted on behalf of the respondent that in actuality the appellant is making out a claim for a decree of divorce on the basis of allegations for which he himself is singularly responsible and that on the said allegations, it was the appellant who deserves to be castigated. Therefore, he cannot be allowed to seek dissolution of marriage.
Dismissing the appeals of the husband, the Supreme Court Held:
The appellant had taken recourse to cumulatively project the factual position for both the grounds, on the basis whereof annulment of marriage was sought i.e. on account of intemperate behaviour, as well as, on account of the alleged mental condition of the wife.
On the basis of the evidence of the case it is not possible to record that the respondent wife suffers from any incurable unsoundness of mind. It is also not possible to hold that she suffers from such mental disorder that it cannot be reasonably expected of her husband to live with her. The evidence produced before the Family Court leaves no room but to conclude that the respondent meely suffers from mild to moderate cognitive deficiencies. She is categorised by the medical experts as an individual of moderate intelligence. The material on the record of the case reveals that she would further benefit from neuropsychological rehabilitation measures, which are available at NIMHANS. Even though the said deficiencies could influence her day-to-day functioning, but the expert opinion is unanimous that the same would not come in her way to discharge her matrimonial obligations. It cannot also be overlooked that experts have clearly expressed that the respondent exhibits normal and adequate emotional responses. She has, right from the beginning, fervently expressed the desire to restore her relationship with her husband, and to live a normal life, in a matrimonial relationship with him. In the aforesaid view of the matter, it is not possible that the mental condition of the respondent is such as would persuade the Court to accept the husband's appeal under Section 13(1)(iii) of the Act.
......
54.In the context of doing justice it was suggested, that the appellant would be ready and willing to pay the respondent, whatever was considered appropriate by this Court. We are informed, that the appellant is financially well-to-do. We shall, therefore, keep in our mind the appellant's offer while examining the instant issue. We would, in our endeavour to determine the issue in hand, examine the matter, by reversing the roles of the parties. We will examine the matter as if, the wife had approached the Family Court seeking divorce, on the ground that her husband had suffered brain damage leading to cognitive deficiencies. Yet, despite the said deficiencies, his working memory had returned to "near normal" after treatment. And his mental condition was such that it would not have any effect on his matrimonial obligations. And the wife's family is agreeable to pay an amount to be determined by this Court (just as the husband-Darshan Gupta, has offered), so as to enable their daughter to break away, and find a more suitable match. Should she have been granted freedom from her matrimonial ties, in the given facts, in order to do complete justice to the parties? We would ask ourselves, whether the husband would have accepted such a plea, in the facts denoted above? In such situation, if this Court had, in exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 142 of the Constitution of India, granted compensation to the husband, and had dissolved his marriage on the pretext of doing complete justice between the parties, would the same be acceptable to the husband? We have no doubt in our mind, that on a reversal of roles, the husband, without any fault of his own, would have never accepted as just, the dissolution of his matrimonial ties, even if the couple had been separated for a duration, as is the case in hand. Especially, if the husband had, right from the beginning, fervently expressed the desire to restore his matrimonial relationship with his wife, and to live a normal life with her.
24.These two judgments would have no application at all to the facts and circumstances of the instant case and this Court does not find any material to hold that the petitioner is entitled to get the relief under Section 13(1)(iii) of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955.

25.In (2010) 14 Supreme Court Cases 301, in the case of Gurbux Singh v. Harminder Kaur, it is held that Hindu Marriage Act, 1955  S.13(1)(i-a)  Divorce - Grounds  Cruelty  A few instances of abuse whether amounts to cruelty  Appellant husband only mentioned one stray incident of respondent wife abusing his parents in divorce petition  Held, though even a single act of violence which is of grievous and inexcusable nature satisfies test of cruelty, married life should be assessed as a whole  A few isolated instances over certain period do not amount to cruelty  On facts, held, marriage cannot be dissolved on such instances.

...The married life should be assessed as a whole and a few isolated instances over certain period will not amount to cruelty. The ill conduct must be precedent for a fairly lengthy period where the relationship has deteriorated to an extent that because of the acts and behavior of a spouse, one party finds it extremely difficult to live with the other party no longer may amount to mental cruelty. Making certain statements on the spur of the moment and expressing certain displeasure about the behavior of elders may not be characterized as cruelty. Mere trivial irritations, quarrels, normal wear and tear of married life which happens in day to day life in all families would not be adequate for grant of divorce on the ground of cruelty. Sustained unjustifiable and reprehensible conduct affecting physical and mental health of the other spouse may lead to mental cruelty. Both the appellant and the respondent being highly qualified persons, the appellant being Principal in ITI college, the respondent working as a Librarian in a government institute, as isolated friction on some occasion life festival of lohri even in the presence of others cannot be a valid ground for dissolving the marriage.

15. .... There is no such complaint by the appellant. In the case no hand, as stated earlier, the appellant has projected few instances in which, according to him, the respondent abused his parents. We have verified all the averments in the petitions, reply statement, written submissions as well as the evidence of both parties. We are satisfied that on the basis of such instances, marriage cannot be dissolved.

16.The married life should be assessed as a whole and a few isolated instances over certain period will not amount to cruelty. The ill conduct must be precedent for a fairly lengthy period where the relationship has deteriorated to an extent that because of the acts and behaviour of a spouse, one party finds it extremely difficult to live with the other party no longer may amount to mental cruelty. Making certain statements on the spur of the moment and expressing certain displeasure about the behaviour of elders may not be characterised as cruelty. Mere trivial irritations, quarrels, normal wear and tear of married life which happens in day to day life in all families would not be adequate for grant of divorce on the ground of cruelty. Sustained unjustifiable and reprehensible conduct affecting physical and mental health of the other spouse may lead to mental cruelty. Both the appellant and the respondent being highly qualified persons, the appellant being Principal in ITI College, the respondent working as a Librarian in a government institute, an isolated friction on some occasion like festival of lohri even in the presence of others cannot be a valid ground for dissolving the marriage.

20.Finally, a feeble argument was made that both the appellant and the respondent were living separately from 2002 and it would be impossible for their reunion, hence this Court exercising its jurisdiction under Article 142 of the Constitution, their marriage may be dissolved in the interest of both parties. Though, on a rare occasion, this Court has granted the extraordinary relief dehors the grounds mentioned in Section 13 in view of the fact that the issue has been referred to a larger Bench about permissibility of such course at present, we are not inclined to accede to the request of the appellant. If there is any change of law or additional ground included in Section 13 by the Act of Parliament, the appellant is free to avail the same at the appropriate time.

26.In (1988) 1 Supreme Court Cases 105, in the case of Shobha Rani Versus- Madhukar Reddi, it is held as follows:

Hindu Marriage Act, 1955  Section 13(1)(i-a)  'Cruelty' - Meaning and proof of  Continuous demands of dowry made on wife in her matrimonial house with the connivance of husband, held on facts, constituted cruelty on the wife entitling her to decree for divorce  Court would draw inference and decide on the basis of preponderance of probabilities having regard to the nature of conduct of the other spouse and its impact on the complaining spouse in the context of their standard of life  Penal Code, 1860, Section 498-A  Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961  Dowry Prohibition (Amendment) Act, 1984.
The demand for dowry is prohibited under law. That by itself is bad enough. That amounts to cruelty entitling the wife to get a decree for dissolution of marriage in the facts and circumstances of the case. The evidence of harassment to the wife to meet any unlawful demand for money is necessary to constitute cruelty in criminal law but not under Section 13(1)(i-a). The evidence of the appellant wife that her mother-in-law used to make repeated demands of money from her with the support of the respondent-husband cannot be brushed aside merely because the appellants father had not been examined. The evidence of the appellant's father was not material as the dowry was not directly demanded from him. It is also not proper to discredit the wife as hypersensitive or prone to exaggeration. That would be judging the wife by the style of manners and standard of life of the Judges. That cannot be done. Court must try to understand her feelings and then search for the nugget of truth in the entire evidence.
Cruelty under Section 13(1)(i-a) if not admitted requires to be proved on the preponderance of probabilities as in civil cases and not beyond a reasonable doubt as in criminal cases. The facts and circumstances brought out by the appellant in this case do justify an inference that there was demand for dowry which constituted cruelty under Section 13(1)(ia).
27.In (2015) 11 Supreme Court Cases 539, in the case of Ramchander v. Ananta, wherein it is held that Family and Personal laws  Hindu Marriage Act, 1955  Ss. 13(1)(i-a) & 13(1)(i-b)  Divorce  Grounds  Cruelty and Desertion  Instances of  Change of residence, abuse and neglect of husband and son, case filed by wife under S. 498-A IPC, extramarital affair, desertion  Cumulative effect of  Whether convincing enough to lead to a conclusion as to irretrievable breakdown of marriage.

Family and Personal Laws  Hindu Law  Hindu Marriage, Act, 1955  S. 13(1)(i-a)  Cruelty  Scope of  Held, expression cruelty has not been defined in Hindu Marriage act- In cases of S.13(1)(i-a) cruelty is to be taken as such physical or mental behavior by one spouse towards another which causes a reasonable apprehension that it is not safe for him or her to continue matrimonial relationship  Mental cruelty is necessarily a matter of inference to be drawn from the facts and circumstances of the case.

It is settled law that instances of cruelty are not to be taken in isolation but cumulative effect of facts and circumstances emerging from evidence on record and then drawing a fair inference whether plaintiff has been subjected to mental cruelty due to conduct of the other spouse  Instances of mental cruelty asset out in Samar Ghosh, (2007) 4 SCC 511 are only illustrative and not exhaustive  Words and Phrases  Cruelty Dismissing the appeal, the Supreme Court Held:

The expression cruelty has not been defined in the Hindu Marriage Act. Cruelty for the purpose of Section 13(1)(i-a) is to be taken as a behavior by one spouse towards the other, which causes a reasonable apprehension in the mind of the latter that it is not safe for him or her to continue the matrimonial relationship with the other. Cruelty can be physical or mental. In the present case, there is no allegation of physical cruelty alleged by the plaintiff. What is alleged is mental cruelty and it is necessarily a matter of inference to be drawn from the facts and circumstances of the case. It is settled law that the instances of cruelty are not to be taken in isolation but to take the cumulative effect of the facts and circumstances emerging from the evidence on record and then draw a fair inference whether the plaintiff has been subjected to mental cruelty due to conduct of the other spouse. Illustrative cases of instances of mental cruelty as set out in Samar Ghosh case are only illustrative and not exhaustive.
Appeal dismissed
8. ... It is further submitted that the wife was compelled to live separately on account of the conduct of the husband. The further submission was that the impugned judgment does not suffer from any legal infirmity warranting interference.
10.The expression cruelty has not been defined in the Hindu Marriage Act. Cruelty for the purpose of Section 13(1)(i-a) is to be taken as a behaviour by one spouse towards the other, which causes a reasonable apprehension in the mind of the latter that it is not safe for him or her to continue the matrimonial relationship with the other. Cruelty can be physical or mental. In the present case there is no allegation of physical cruelty alleged by the plaintiff. What is alleged is mental cruelty and it is necessarily a matter of inference to be drawn from the facts and circumstances of the case. It is settled law that the instances of cruelty are not to be taken in isolation but to take the cumulative effect of the facts and circumstances emerging from the evidence on record and then draw a fair inference whether the plaintiff has been subjected to mental cruelty due to conduct of the other spouse. In the decision in Samar Ghosh case this Court set out illustrative cases where inference of mental cruelty can be drawn and they are only illustrative and not exhaustive.
12.The next instance alleged by the plaintiff husband is that the defendant wife used to abuse him as dhobi and the son as dhobis son and such utterances had adverse effect on them. PW1 plaintiff and PW2 the son have stated so in their testimonies. ....
13.It is further alleged that the defendant wife was reluctant to do any household work and was not cooking food for the plaintiff and the child which necessitated the bringing of food from outside, amounting to mental cruelty. Being a working mother, she could not spare enough time to be with the child resulting in the feeling of not being cared for. In this context it is relevant to point out that the child was residing with his father since the alleged separation in 2003. ....
14.The next instance is the allegation made by the wife in the case filed by her under Section 498-A IPC against the husband. Admittedly, the case was withdrawn by the wife and she continued to live with the husband. In fact the High Court has observed in the impugned judgment that though the date of filing of the criminal complaint is not mentioned in the plaint, from the sequence of narration of events therein it appears to have been filed prior to the birth of the child. The aberration on the part of the wife has been condoned by the husband by resuming cohabitation and they continued to live together till the date of alleged separation in 2003.
15.The last instance of cruelty alleged by the husband is the allegation made by the wife that he has been involved in an extramarital affair with the daily-rated mazdoor lady working under him. It is true that the defendant wife has named the said lady with whom her husband allegedly was having an affair. The plaintiff husband though admitted that the said lady was working under him, has specifically denied the said allegation. The courts below have concurrently found that the wife has not substantiated the said allegation. Mere failure to prove such allegation would not entitle the husband to a decree of divorce as rightly held by the High Court. The conduct of the wife that had been complained of appears to be not so grave and weighty that it can be treated to be more serious than ordinary wear and tear of married life.
16. ... The High Court on going through their testimonies has concluded that it does not find their evidence unworthy of credence. We are in agreement with the said view expressed by the High Court. Resultantly, the ground of desertion alleged is also not established.
18.In the result there is no merit in the appeal and the same is dismissed. No costs.
28.In II (2017) DMC 28 (SC), in the case of Suman Singh -Versus- Sanjay Singh, it is held that (i) Hindu Marriage Act, 1955  Section 13(1)(ia)  Cruelty - Isolated incidents  Incidents alleged should be recurring nature or continuing one and they should be in near proximity with filing of petition  Few isolated incidents of long past and that too found to have been condoned due to compromising behavior of parties cannot constitute an act of cruelty within meaning of Section 13(1)(ia) of Act  Petition seeking divorce on some isolated incidents alleged to have occurred 8-10 years prior to filing of date of petition cannot furnish a subsisting cause of action to seek divorce after 10 years or so of occurrence of such incidents.

... Acts complained of were condoned by parties due to their subsequent conduct inasmuch as both lived together till 2006 and appellant gave birth to their second daughter in 2006  Incidents which occurred prior to 2006 could not be relied on to prove instances of cruelty because they were deemed to have been condoned by acts of parties...

... There could be myriad reasons for causing such isolated incident...

... It was respondent-husband and who withdrew from company of appellant-wife without reasonable cause and not vice versa  Appellant-wife is entitled for decree for restitution of conjugal rights against respondent  Impugned judgment set aside and decree for restitution of conjugal right passed against respondent-husband.

7.... However, the year was not mentioned.

9.The fourth ground of cruelty was again about the indecent behavior of the appellant towards the respondent's family members. However, no details were pleaded except making general averments (Para 12).

10.... instead that the couple should live separately from the respondent's parents (Para 13).

26.This we hold for more than one reason. First, almost all the grounds taken by the respondent in his petition were stale or/and isolated and did not subsist to enable the respondent to seek a decree for dissolution of marriage. In other words, the incidents of cruelty alleged had taken place even, according to the respondent, immediately after marriage. They were solitary incidents relating to the behavior of the appellant. Second, assuming that one or more grounds constituted an act of cruelty, yet we find that the acts complained of were condoned by the parties due to their subsequent conduct inasmuch as admittedly both lived together till 2006 and the appellant gave birth to their second daughter in 2006. Third, most of the incidents of alleged cruelty pertained to the period prior to 2006 and some were alleged to have occurred after 2006. Those pertained to period after 2006 were founded on general allegations with no details pleaded such as when such incident occurred (year, month, date etc.), what was its background, who witnessed, what the appellant actually said etc.

27.In our view, the incidents which occurred prior to 2006 could not be relied on to prove the instances of cruelty because they were deemed to have been condoned by the acts of the parties. So far as the instances alleged after 2006 were concerned, they being isolated instances, did not constitute an act of cruelty.

35. ...the burden being on the respondent, the same could be discharged by the respondent by pleading and then proving.

39. ...As a result, the petition filed by the respondent (husband) under Section 13(1) of the Act seeking dissolution of marriage is dismissed. As a consequence thereof, the marriage between the parties is held to subsist whereas the petition filed by the appellant against the respondent under Section 9 of the Act seeking restitution of conjugal right is allowed. A decree for restitution of conjugal right is, accordingly, passed against the respondent.

40.We hope and trust that the parties would now realize their duties and obligations against each other as also would realize their joint obligations as mother and father towards their grown up daughters. Both should, therefore, give quite burial to their past deeds/acts and bitter experiences and start living together and see that their daughters are well settled in their respective lives. Such reunion, we feel, would be in the interest of all family members in the long run and will bring peace, harmony and happiness. We find that the respondent is working as a Caretaker in the Government Department (see Para 4 of his petition). He must, therefore, be the Caretaker of his own family that being his first obligation and at the same time attend to his Government duties to maintain his family.

29.However, this Court does not find any evidence to substantiate the case of the Petitioner under Section 13(1) (iii) of Hindu Marriage Act, 1955. Further, there is no cross examination materially on that point that is by touching the mental health of the Respondent. So, in the considered opinion of this Court, the Petitioner has not proved his case with regard to the mental ill heath of the Respondent as defined under Section 13(1) (iii) of Hindu Marriage Act, 1955. So, in this regard the finding of the Learned Trial Judge with regard to the second point for consideration that is the petitioner has not proved about the alleged mental ill-health of the respondent is confirmed. So, this Court has no hesitation to reject the case of the petitioner for divorce under Section 13(1) (iii) of Hindu Marriage Act, 1955.

30.At the same time the grounds raised by the Petitioner by invoking Section 13(1) (ia) of Hindu Marriage Act are to be taken up for consideration.

31.It is seen from the records that admittedly the Respondent left the matrimonial home at the fag end of December, 2002. On the side of the petitioner, it is contended that the Respondent left matrimonial home on her own volition with an intention to desert the petitioner. At the same time, it is contended by the learned Counsel for the Respondent that the respondent left the matrimonial home with a bonafide belief that she would be taken back to the matrimonial home at the earliest. However, it is to be noted here that when the Respondent left matrimonial home to her parental home, instead of initiated steps for re-union, she went to a Thapovanam in Villupuram District for her mental rest. This Court is put its anxious consideration that the two children were also not accompanied with the Respondent but forgetting their welfare and their longing for the nearness of mother, the respondent went and sit in a Thapovanam. This particular incident is having significance as thereafter the spouses did not live together.

32.That apart it is the case of the Petitioner that the Respondent used to take sleeping pills in order to threat the Petitioner that she would commit suicide and on some occasion, the respondent took treatment as inpatient. These incidents, according to the learned senior counsel for the Petitioner would constitute the act of cruelty, since the petitioner being a business man cannot concentrate his work as the Respondent often attempt to commit suicide. Being an educated woman, the Respondent cannot be expected that she would get good things in the matrimonial life by way of suicide attempt. Absolutely there is no explanation on the side of the Respondent as to why and how even without think about the children, the respondent attempted to commit suicide. As far as cruelty is concerned the onus to prove the particular conduct or behavior resulted in cruelty is on person who claims the relief on the basis of cruelty. The perusal of the evidence would show that no denial on the part of the Respondent during the cross examination that she had not attempted to commit suicide, then the same would show the respondent attempted to commit suicide.

33.Apart from that she also used to lodge a complaint against the Petitioner more than one occasion, however for the reasons best known to her only, the police complaints were not pursued, this would also show the petitioner meets out cruelty at the hands of the Respondent. So, in the considered view of this Court, the judgments relied on by the learned Counsel for the respondent is supporting the case of the petitioner only.

34.At this juncture, it is to be ascertained that the Respondent was mainly made wild allegations against the petitioner which in the opinion of this Court amounting to cruelty as the Respondent did not initiate legal action on her allegations against the petitioner. Further, it is also seen from the records that the respondent also spread wild allegations with an intention to destroy the social reputation of the Petitioner and the same would cause irreparable injury on the mind of the petitioner. The term cruelty has not been defined in the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955. However, according to Section 13 of the Hindu Marriage Act, it is stated that (1) any marriage solemnized whether before or after the commencement of the Act, may, on a petition presented either the husband or the wife be dissolved by a decree on the ground that the other party 

(i) has, after the solemnisation of the marriage, had voluntary sexual intercourse with any person other than his or her spouse; or] (i-a) has, after the solemnization of the marriage, treated the petitioner with cruelty; or

(iii) has been incurably of unsound mind, or has been suffering continuously or intermittently from mental disorder of such a kind and to such an extent that the petitioner cannot reasonably be expected to live with the respondent.

35.At the same time cruelty can be ascertained or inferred with in relation to matrimonial matters. It is contemplated as a conduct of such time which endangers of the living with the petitioner with the respondent. Further, cruelty consists of acts which are dangerous to life, limb or health. Cruelty may be by physical or mental. Mental cruelty is the conduct of other spouse which causes mental suffering in the matrimonial life of other. Mental cruelty also is a state of mind and feelings and therefore necessary a matter or inference to drawn from the facts and circumstances of the case where once spouse succeeded in proving the attitude of other spouse was not cordial and co-operative and their marriage life was never happy for long period then the Court is bound to consider the relief for divorce. However, in this case allegations are made by the spouses against each other.

36.But, the factor which directly relating with the security of life which has to be viewed constitutionally. In a case reported in AIR 1993 Delhi -135, Rajinder Bharatwaj Vs Anitha Sharma, it is held that throwing foot-wear on the respondent in the presence of his or her parents is cruelty and sufficient ground for granting divorce. In the instant case though the respondent made wild allegations against her father-in-law as if he misbehaved with her daughter, without any justification she left the matrimonial home by left the children with the custody of the petitioner. This Particular incident is to be viewed seriously. If at all the allegations made against the father-in-law are true, in the opinion of this Court, the respondent would not have left the children with the custody of the petitioner. On the other hand, without worrying about the children the respondent went to a Thapovanam in search of peace. As far as Hindu women is concerned and in general the mother will have much affection with the child as according to the natural phenomenon women is the creature to give birth and child is in the womb of the mother for nearly about 9 months. The respondent, on the one hand making wild allegation against the petitioner and his father, but she left the children with their custody. So it is understandable that the allegations made against the father- in-law of the respondent are untrue. Moreover, though imputations tarnishing the moral character of the petitioner and his father were made by the respondent, no attempt was shown by the respondent to prove the same, but in the opinion of this Court these unproved wild allegation would definitely affect the mental equilibrium of the petitioner.

37.Apart from that the death of the father-in-law of the respondent is to be analyzed. According to the petitioner, his father was died after two weeks of the wild allegations made against him by intentionally tarnishing his social and moral character. So the death assumes some importance. When the petitioner specifically pleaded that his father was died on account of the accusation of the respondent, suggestion must be put forth by denying the reason for death of the petitioners father. No oral evidence was let in by the respondent that the petitioners father was not died on account of accusation and he was died followed by sickness or on account of some other physical ailment. In the absence of any such suggestion this Court has no option other than to believe the version of the petitioner. Moreover, the respondent did not even attend the funeral rites, which in the mind of the Court that the respondent was not at all willing for reunion. In such a disturbed state of mind it cannot be expected that the petitioner would live happily with the respondent but the same would amount to cruelty. At the same time, her act of making wild imputations which claimed the life of an elderly person would definitely come under the purview of cruelty. At this juncture, this Court is helpless to hold that the respondent is making out any case that her acts does not come under the purview of causing any mental cruelty upon the petitioner.

38.Further, it is not the case of the respondent that because of any of the alleged act of the petitioner she was forced to commit suicide, at the same time it is the specific averment of the petitioner that with an intention to disturb the mental peacefulness of the petitioner, the respondent attempted to commit the suicide. When an allegation is pleaded that must be specifically denied under order VIII, Rule 5 and 6 of C.P.C. Here the perusal of the records would show that the pleadings of the petitioner with regard to the attempts of the respondent to commit suicide are not specifically denied by the respondent. Once the respondent has failed to deny the averments of the petitioner then the same is to be taken as proved. However, as the attempt of the respondent to commit suicide has not been denied by her, then it is to be construed as the said act of attempt of commit suicide would cause cruelty upon the mind of the petitioner.

39.At the same time on either side prior to the filing of the case, there were no circumstances for proper guidance and mediation by the elders and the same is reflected even after the filing of the petition also. Apart from that another allegation is made that the respondent did not permit the petitioner to have conjugal relationship for quiet considerable period prior to the filing of the case. The perusal of the evidence available would show that the same has not been denied by the respondent. Between the spouses sex is the binding force that is not only mean the physical contact or satisfaction, but the mental peacefulness too. In such a background the expectation of a healthy husband having conjugal relationship with his healthy wife is reasonable. So the denial of conjugal relationship without any valid cause would also amount to cruelty.

40.At this juncture, it is to be taken into account that the respondent made allegations as the petitioner was having affairs with a woman namely, Muthu and they were wandering in car on several occasions. But, on the side of the respondent, no effort was taken to prove the same except by putting suggestion. When having relationship with a paramour is an offence as well as the same would deeply affect the marital relationship between the spouses, the standard and decree of proof of the particular factor would be definitely high but that was done by the respondent before the trial Court. At the same time making bald allegation that too assassinate the character of other that would cause cruelty upon the person who received the wild but bald allegation.

41.In the result, for the forgoing discussion, both the Civil Miscellaneous Appeals are partly allowed. A decree of divorce is granted under Section 13(1)(ia) of the Hindu Marriage Act 1955. However, the respondent wife is entitled to initiate separate proceedings for the visitation of the children keeping note of the fact that both the children have attained majority. Consequently, connected miscellaneous petitions are closed.


					      (C.T.S.,J.)		(M.V.M.,J.)
vs							    05.06.2018
Index:Yes
Internet:Yes
Speaking order
To
The Principal Judge, Family Court, Chennai.


C.T.SELVAM,J.
									and
							    M.V.MURALIDARAN,J.

Vs













Pre-Delivery Judgment made in
C.M.A.Nos.522 and 523 of 2009 and
M.P.No.1 of 2009 and

















05.06.2018
          
================================================================================


================================================================================
CASE 24:
[Cites 188, Cited by 0]
Patna High Court
Rajan Tiwary vs State Of Bihar Thru.C.B.I on 17 May, 2013
Author: V.N. Sinha
Bench: V.N. Sinha, Amaresh Kumar Lal
       IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT PATNA

                      Criminal Appeal (DB) No.418 of 2008

(Against the judgment of conviction and order of sentence dated 14.02.2008
passed by Additional Sessions Judge XI, Patna in Sessions Trial No. 976 of
1999)
===========================================================
Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav, son of Sri Chandra Narayan Prasad, resident of
Court Station Road, P.S. K. Hat Purnea, district Purnea, Bihar, presently lodged at
Jail No.3, Central Jail, Tihar, New Delhi
                                                                .... .... Appellant/s
                                        Versus
The State of Bihar through the C.B.I.
                                                               .... .... Respondent/s
                                         With
                       Criminal Appeal (DB) No. 240 of 2008
===========================================================
Anil Kumar Yadav, son of Hari Yadav, resident of mohalla Moranga, police station
Moranga (K. Hat), district Purnea
                                                                .... .... Appellant/s
                                        Versus
The State of Bihar through the C.B.I
                                                               .... .... Respondent/s
                                         With
                       Criminal Appeal (DB) No. 361 of 2008
===========================================================
Rajan Tiwary, son of Vishwa Jeevan Tripathy, resident of village Sahgaura, P.S.
Gagaha in the town and district of Gorakhpur (Uttar Pradesh)
                                                                .... .... Appellant/s
                                        Versus
The State of Bihar through the C.B.I
                                                               .... .... Respondent/s
===========================================================
Appearance :
(In CR. APP (DB) No. 418 of 2008)
For the Appellant/s :        M/s. Shrikant V. Bhat, Rakesh Kumar Singh, Ravi
                             Sharma, Rajesh Ranjan, J. John, Ajit Kumar Ojha,
                             Nutan Mishra, Pandey Sanjay Sahay, Advocates.

(In CR. APP (DB) No. 240 of 2008)
For the Appellant/s :   M/s. Ramakant Sharma, Sr. Advocate, Ajeet Ojha,
                        Nutan Mishra, Advocate.

(In CR. APP (DB) No. 361 of 2008)
For the Appellant/s :   M/s. Surendra Singh, Sr. Advocate, Dr. Abhishek
                       Priyadarshi, Advocate

(For C.B.I. in all appeals) : M/s. Rakesh Kumar Khanna, Sr. Advocate (Additional
                            Solicitor General of India for C.B.I), Harsh Prabhakar,
                            Anando Mukherjee, Bipin Kumar Sinha (Standing
                            Counsel for C.B.I.), Prabhu Narayan Sharma, Sunil
          Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013                               2




                                           Kumar Ravi, Shashi Shekhar Kumar Prasad, Advocates.

             (For P.W. 9 in all appeals) : M/s. Jitendra Singh, Sr. Advocate, Soni Shrivastava,
                                          Amit Prakash, Ravi Bhardwaj, Amit Pawan,
                                          Advocates.

             ===========================================================
             CORAM: HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE V.N. SINHA
              And
             HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE AMARESH KUMAR LAL
             C.A.V. JUDGMENT
             (Per: HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE V.N. SINHA)
             Date: 17-05-2013

V.N. Sinha, J.                These three appeals are filed against the judgment and order

                 dated 14.02.2008 passed by Additional Sessions Judge-XI, Patna in

                 Sessions Trial No. 976 of 1999 whereby the three appellants, namely,

                 Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav, Anil Kumar Yadav and Rajan Tiwari

                 have been convicted under Section 302 read with Section 120(B),

                 302/34, 302/34 and 307/34 of the Indian Penal Code and Section 27 of

                 the Arms Act respectively and sentenced to undergo rigorous

                 imprisonment for life as also to pay fine of Rs.10,000/- each, in default

                 of payment of fine to further undergo rigorous imprisonment for one

                 year. Appellant Rajan Tiwary has been further directed to undergo

                 rigorous imprisonment for seven years each for the offence under

                 Sections 307/34 I.P.C. and 27 of the Arms Act. The sentences, however,

                 has been directed to run concurrently.

                               2. Prosecution case as set out in the fardbeyan, Ext. 27 of

                 Kalyan Chandra Sarkar, P.W. 8 recorded by Sri A.K. Jha, P.W. 56

                 Circle Inspector, Sadar Purnia at the residence of late Ajit Sarkar on
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013                   3




      14.6.1998
at 17.45 hours is that informant came to the house of his brother Ajit Sarkar in the morning between 7-8 hours, was taking stroll outside the house of his brother at about 4.30 P.M.(16.30 hours) two comrades of his brother Masudan Rishi, P.W. 9 resident of Kaliganj and Lal Bahadur Rishi, P.W. 10 resident of Khakibari also joined him. While talking to the two comrades informant came ahead of Kali flour mill near the school he saw a motorcycle parked on the road. Near the motorcycle two persons (1) Jawahar Yadav, resident of Purnia and (2) Abdul Sattar, resident of Kaliganj were seen. Abdul Sattar signalled the car of his brother Ajit Sarkar coming from opposite direction to stop. The car stopped, by then (3) Diwakar Chaudhary 4) Pappu Dev came on motorcycle from the front, (5) Bipin Singh and 6-7 others variously armed also came in a car and resorted to indiscriminate firing. The two persons who signalled the car to stop also fired from rifle. Having seen the occurrence informant asked Masudan Rishi as to what is happening and raising alarm came back towards the village. The assailants escaped towards the N.H., the direction from which they had come. Meanwhile, many others also came and saw the assailants running away. Informant along with others went near the car and saw his brother Ajit Sarkar (2) Asfaq Alam of Mahmadia Estate (3) Hirendra Sharma, resident of Sausa Adampur dead, Bodyguard Ramesh Oraon seriously injured, who was taken to the hospital by the villagers. In the penultimate paragraph of Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 4 the fardbeyan informant claimed that accused named in the fardbeyan conspired to kill his brother and others as also to grievously hurt the Bodyguard. In the last paragraph of the fardbeyan informant further stated that statement given by him has been read over, read and understood by him and having found the same to be correct put his signature over the fardbeyan in Hindi. Besides the informant fardbeyan has also been signed by Lal Bahadur Oraon, P.W. 10 and Bilin Chandra Sarkar (not examined) as witness of the fact that fardbeyan has been scribed by Inspector A.K. Jha, P.W. 56 on the statement of the informant. Sri A.K. Jha, P.W. 56 having recorded the fardbeyan forwarded the fardbeyan to Officer in Charge, Khajanchi Hat P.S. to institute a case under Sections 302/34, 120(B) of the Indian Penal Code and Section 27 of the Arms Act and took up the investigation. In the light of the fardbeyan Officer in charge, K. Hat P.S. registered K. Hat P.S. Case No.230/98 dated 14.6.1998 at 10 P.M. under Sections 302/34, 120(B) I.P.C. and Sections 27 of the Arms Act, Ext.31 stating that Inspector A.K. Jha has already taken up investigation of the case under order from S.P., Purnia. A.K. Jha having recorded the fardbeyan inspected the place of occurrence and found three empty cartridges of A.K.-47, which were seized by him vide seizure list Ext. 26. The inquest of the three dead body was also made by the I.O. A.K. Jha vide Exts. Y, Y/1 and Y/2. Injured having been shifted to the hospital was Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 5 examined by Dr. R.D. Raman, P.W. 15 vide injury report, Ext. 24. In the night between 14-15.6.1998 further statement of the informant and statement of the two eye witnesses Madhusudan Rishi and Lal Bahadur Oraon was recorded reiterating the contents of the fardbeyan. The house of the accused named in fardbeyan was also raided in the same night but none was found at their residence. There was a public outcry after the incident and only upon the visit of Sri Lalu Prasad Yadav body of Ajit Sarkar was allowed to be taken for post mortem. Post mortem over the dead body of the three deceased was conducted on 15.6.1998 by Dr. B.K. Sinha, P.W. 32 vide Exts. 13, 13/1, 13/2. F.I.R. of K. Hat P.S. Case No. 230/98 was received in the court of C.J.M., Purnea on 16.6.1998 but no particular time of its dispatch by the Investigating Officer, P.W. 56 and receipt by Judicial Magistrate is recorded over the same. On 16.6.1998 the Government of Bihar issued notification no.492/H.S. dated 16.6.1998 expressing its resolve to appoint a Commission of enquiry in terms of Section 3 of the Commission of Enquiry Act, 1952 to be headed by a retired High Court judge to be nominated by Hon'ble the Chief Justice of the Patna High Court. Kalyan Chandra Sarkar, P.W. 8 furnished on 22.6.1998 the alias name of accused no.5 of K.Hat P.S. Case No.230/98 to the I.O. of the said case along with his address, whereafter Bipin Singh was arrested and remanded to judicial custody on 23.6.1998. Smt. Madhvi Bose (Sarkar) Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 6 wife of deceased Ajit Sarkar made a written request to Hon'ble the Chief Minister, Bihar on 1.7.1998 to transfer the investigation of K.Hat P.S. Case No.230/98 to Central Bureau of Investigation (hereinafter referred to as the C.B.I.) During investigation of K. Hat P.S. Case No. 230/98 Smt. Madhvi Sarkar, wife of the deceased Ajit Sarkar filed application under Section 452 Cr.P.C. before C.J.M., Purnea on 19.7.1998 for release of Ambassador Car bearing Registration No. BHK-1426 which was allowed under order dated 25.7.1998 and the car was handed over to Smt. Madhvi Sarkar. While the investigation of K. Hat P.S. Case No.230/98 continued State Government issued notification dated 11.8.1998 under Section 6 of the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act 1946, Ext. 3 granting its consent for investigation of K. Hat P.S. Case No.230/98 by the C.B.I. While Government of India considered the request made by the State Government under notification dated 11.8.1998, Purnia district police recorded the statement of one Sanjay Rai under Section 164 Cr.P.C. on 12.08.19998 and submitted charge sheet dated 20.9.1998 on 21.9.1998 in the court of Chief Judicial Magistrate, Purnia finding the accusation true against Bipin Singh @ Bipin Chaudhary the arrested accused and four others named in the fardbeyan showing them absconders. From perusal of charge sheet, it appears that Purnia police continued the investigation against the suspects named by Sanjay Rai in his statement recorded under Section Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 7 164 Cr.P.C. on 12.8.1998 including these three appellants. C.J.M., Purnia having perused the charge sheet took cognizance of the offences found true by Purnia police in charge sheet dated 20.9.1998 under order dated 23.9.1998 summoned the accused sent up for trial i.e. Bipin Singh, the four absconders and kept pending the supplementary investigation against 11 persons, namely, (1) Pappu Yadav (2) Harish Chaudhary (3) Amar Yadav (4) Prabhat Yadav (5) Pawan Yadav (6) Pankaj Yadav (7) Santosh Yadav (8)) Raju Yadav (9) Rajan Tiwary (10) Manoj Yadav and (11) Anil Yadav.

3. Government of India under notification dated 28.9.1998, Ext. 42 entrusted investigation of K.Hat P.S. Case No.230/98 to the C.B.I. C.B.I. having taken the investigation of K.Hat P.S. Case No.230/98 registered on 12.10.1998 First Information No. RC 12(S)/98- SIC-IV/New Delhi, Ext. 37/1 under the signature of Sri Harbansh Singh, S.P., C.B.I. (not examined) incorporating the contents of fardbeyan of K.Hat P.S. Case No.230/98. After registration of RC 12(S)/98-SIC-IV/New Delhi, Ext. 37/1 investigation of the said case was entrusted to Sri N.H. Kharayat, Dy. S.P., C.B.I., P.W. 61 and Inspector M.L. Meena, P.W. 57. The investigating team reached Purnia on 21/22.10.1998 for conducting further investigation and met D.M., S.P., Purnea and P.W. 56 who was Investigating Officer of K. Hat P.S. Case No. 230/98 and asked P.W. 56 to hand over the case record, which Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 8 was handed over to P.W. 61 on 23.10.1998. P.W. 61 recorded the statement of Ravindra Nath Singh, Kalyan Chandra Sarkar, Madhusudan Rishi and Lal Bahadur Oraon, P.Ws. 7, 8, 9 and 10 on 25.10.1998, 24.10.1998, 29.10.1998 and 28.10.1998 respectively. While making statement to the I.O. of C.B.I., P.W. 61 P.W. 8 disowned his statement recorded on 14.6.1998 at 5.45 P.M. on the basis of which fardbeyan, Ext. 27 was recorded by Inspector A.K. Jha, P.W. 56. He also disowned his re-statement made before A.K. Jha during the night between 14-15.6.1998 under Section 161 Cr.P.C. In the statement made before the I.O., C.B.I. P.W. 8 claimed that while he reached ahead of Kali Flour Mill near culvert along with P.Ws. 9, 10 he saw Ajit Sarkar coming in his white Ambassador car bearing No.BHK-1426 from a distance of 100-150 yards. He further claimed that a red bullet motorcycle having two occupants intercepted the car followed by another black Yamaha motorcycle also occupied by two persons stopped on the right side of the car. The pillion rider on the red bullet motorcycle shot at the driver of the car. The driver of bullet motorcycle kept the motorcycle in start position. The pillion rider of black Yamaha motorcycle resorted to indiscriminate firing on the person of Ajit Sarkar with a weapon which appeared like A.K. 47. The accused driving Yamaha motorcycle was firing from a small weapon. According to P.W. 8 accused persons riding the motorcycle killed the driver of the car Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 9 Hirendra Sharma, Ajit Sarkar and Asfaq Alam sitting on the rear seat of the car and injured Ramesh Oraon, Bodyguard sitting in the front next to the driver. According to P.W. 8 after the occurrence many people gathered at the place of occurrence. The dead bodies and the injured were taken to hospital in Ambulance. The dead body of Ajit Sarkar was brought to his residence in the night of 14.6.1998. He further claimed before the I.O., C.B.I. that local police arrived next day on 15.6.1998 between 10-11 A.M. to enquire from him about the incident. P.W. 8 declined to make any statement before the local police but gave the local police blank paper with his signature as per the direction of the police officer who had come to take his statement mentioning 14.6.1998 as the date beneath his signature. P.W. 8 identified his signature over the fardbeyan, Ext. 27 which was marked as Ext. 1/4.

4. P.Ws. 9, 10 stated before the I.O., C.B.I. that they had come to the residence of Ajit Sarkar on 14.6.1998 at about 4 P.M. as Sri Sarkar had called them for providing hand pump but they could not meet Sri Sarkar. P.W. 8 informed them (the witnesses) that Sri Sarkar had gone to village Tharhara for panchayati. P.Ws. 9, 10 along with P.W. 8 then decided to return to their village Rani Patra. While returning P.Ws. 8 to 10 having come ahead of Kali flour mill near culvert saw a white Ambassador car bearing No.BHK-1426 followed by red bullet motorcycle driven by accused Anil Yadav and Harish Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 10 Chaudhary sitting as pillion rider. They also saw a black Yamaha motorcycle driven by Amar Yadav over which Rajan Tiwary was the pillion rider stopping on the right side of the car. Anil Yadav kept the red bullet motorcycle in start position. The other three i.e. the driver of the black motorcycle and the pillion riders of red bullet, black motorcycle resorted to indiscriminate firing killing the driver of the car Harendra Sharma, Ajit Sarkar and Asfaq Alam sitting on the rear seat of the car as also inflicted grievous injury on the person of Ramesh Oraon, P.W. 25 Bodyguard sitting in the front next to the driver. It would appear from the statement of P.Ws. 8 to 10 made before the C.B.I. investigator that they gave a consistent description of an unknown assailant, who was later identified as Rajan Tiwary upon arrest and consequent disclosure made by him in Delhi. Having recorded the statement of P.Ws. 8, 10 the C.B.I. informed C.J.M., Purnia on 28.10.1998 about registration of RC 12(S)/98-SIC-IV/New Delhi, Ext. 37/1 incorporating the contents of the F.I.R. of K.Hat P.S. Case No.230/98 and the fact that C.B.I. is investigating the said case. Sri Abhijit Day, P.W. 28 Senior Scientific Officer-II, CFSL, C.B.I., New Delhi submitted report no.690 dated 23.12.1998, Ext. 9 with regard to three fired cartridges recovered at the spot stating that shots were fired from single 7.62 M.M. assault rifle. S.P., C.B.I. (SIC-IV), New Delhi vide his letter dated 5.1.1999 signed on 6.1.1999, Ext. 5/6 wrote to Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 11 General Manager (Vigilance), MTNL, New Delhi asking for the name of the subscriber of telephone nos. 3730767 and 3736358 including the print out of the calls made from those numbers during the period between 14.4.1998-31.12.1998. Sri K.K. Nayar, P.W. 12 S.D. Vigilance (MTNL) on 15.1.1999 submitted call records of telephone no. 0113730767 Ext. 3/4 and 0113736358 Ext. 3/5 which were installed at Delhi residence of Rajesh Ranjan.

5. Delhi police arrested Rajan Tiwary on 12.2.1999 in connection with R.K. Puram P.S. Case No.122/99 registered for the offences under Section 25 of the Arms Act. After arrest Rajan Tiwary was interrogated on 12.2.1999 by the Crime Branch in Delhi (R.K. Puram) P.S. Case No.122/99, he made disclosure pertaining to K. Hat P.S. Case No.230/98. Rajan Tiwary was produced on 13.2.1999 in the court of Sri K.S. Mohi, Metropolitan Magistrate, Patiala House in connection with R.K. Puram P.S. Case No.122/99 vide remand application dated 13.2.1999, Ext. F/4. Perusal of remand application dated 13.2.1999 filed by S.I. Palbindar Singh of Special Team, Crime Branch indicate that Rajan Tiwary was arrested from house no.14-D Firoz Sah, Road, New Delhi and after his arrest he made disclosure involving himself in murder of Ajit Sarkar, M.L.A., C.P.I. in Purnia, Bihar. He also disclosed that he has kept one pistol in House No.558-A, Sector-3, R.K. Puram, Delhi. Acting upon disclosure made by Rajan Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 12 Tiwary one 7.63 pistol make LLAMA, 15 live cartridges and other articles were seized. It also appears from Ext. F/4 that investigation of R.K. Puram P.S. Case No.122/99 is pending and Rajan Tiwary be remanded to 14 days' judicial custody. In the light of the prayer made in the remand application dated 13.2.1999, Ext. F/4 Rajan Tiwary was remanded to judicial custody until 26.2.1999.

6. According to learned counsel for appellant Rajan Tiwary P.W. 61 obtained illegal custody of Rajan Tiwary on 13.2.1999 from S.I. Palbindar Singh, as would appear from the following endorsement ―received accused in muffled condition with warrant‖ made by P.W. 61 in the margin of petition dated 13.2.1999, Ext. F filed by S.I. Palbindar Singh on the basis of which the Metropolitan Magistrate remanded accused Rajan Tiwary to judicial custody till 26.2.1999. It is submitted that bare perusal of Exts. F/4, F would indicate that S.I. Palbindar Singh had filed petition dated 13.2.1999 before Sri K.S. Mohi, Metropolitan Magistrate, Patiala House for obtaining judicial remand of Rajan Tiwary for 14 days i.e. until 26.2.1999 but P.W. 61 having interpolated the name of the Metropolitan Magistrate from K.S. Mohi to Duty Magistrate obtained illegal custody of Rajan Tiwary until 23.2.1999 during which period subjected him (Rajan Tiwary) to sustained interrogation by moving him from Delhi to Purnia and back. During the period of sustained interrogation search warrant was also obtained on Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 13 17.2.1999 to search the house of the appellants. From Delhi house of accused Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav one photograph, material Ext. VII was seized vide seizure memo Ext. 39 in which appellant Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav, his wife and child are seen with appellant Rajan Tiwary. Appellant Anil Yadav was called to C.B.I. camp office at Purnia on 17.2.1999, arrested and produced before the C.J.M., Purnea on 18.2.1999 who remanded him to C.B.I. custody for 10 days under order dated 18.2.1999 passed in K. Hat P.S. Case No.230/98. Anil Yadav made disclosures on the basis of which red bullet motorcycle was recovered from his house. He was again produced before the C.J.M., Purnea on 28.2.1999 in K. Hat P.S. Case No. 230/98 as suspect. Call details of Katihar P.C.O. booth no.34679 was obtained under Memo No.18.2.1999, Ext. 3 which was issued under the signature of Ramashray Rajak, P.W. 6 S.D. Telephone, Katihar. Appellant Rajan Tiwary also made disclosures on 18/17.2.1999 leading to recoveries vide Exts. 1/8, 1/9, 1/10. Appellant Rajan Tiwary was produced before the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi on 22.2.1999 and a petition, Ext. 41 was filed to examine Rajan Tiwary under Section 164 Cr.P.C. Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi endorsed the said petition to Sri G.S. Saini, Metropolitan Magistrate, P.W. 59. Appellant Rajan Tiwary with muffled face was thereafter produced by I.O., P.W. 61 before Sri G.S. Saini at 12.30 P.M. who sent all the police personnel out of court Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 14 and made Rajan Tiwary to sit in his chamber. Sri Saini explained Rajan Tiwary that he is not bound to make his statement. Sri Saini also informed Rajan Tiwary that if he makes the statement the same shall be used against him as evidence. Rajan Tiwary, however, insisted to make the statement. Sri Saini thereafter gave Rajan Tiwary one hour time to think over the matter again. Sri Saini again asked Rajan Tiwary in his chamber at 1.15 P.M. whether he wants to give confessional statement. Rajan Tiwary stated that he wants to bring real culprit to book and he is making statement voluntarily. Sri Saini again warned Rajan Tiwary that he is not bound to make confessional statement and his statement shall be used as evidence against him but Rajan Tiwary persisted again for making statement. Sri Saini thereafter put following questions to Rajan Tiwary. (1) Why do you want to make confessional statement? Answer :- I want to make statement as I want to improve myself and to disclose the identity of the real culprit. (2) Whether you have been pressurized by police or C.B.I. to make statement. Answer :- I have not been pressurized by any one to record statement, which has been recorded as per my own volition. Having put the aforesaid two questions Sri Saini recorded the statement of Rajan Tiwary after writing that he is making confessional statement voluntarily without any force from any quarter in order to make clean breast. After recording the satisfaction Sri Saini recorded the disclosure statement of Rajan Tiwary, which is as follows Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 15 :- ― He is resident of Gorakhpur. M/s. Sri Prakash Shukla and Anand Pandey were the students of different colleges but they new him (Rajan Tiwary). I (Rajan Tiwary) passed intermediate and took admission in D.A.V. College, Gorakhpur. Sri Prakash Shukla and Anand Pandey were then involved in crime and had connections with him (Rajan Tiwary) as every college student desire that he has acquaintance with those who are brash, lout, bully(Dabang). M/s. Sri Prakash Shukla and Anand Pandey were Railway contractors and were in touch with Surajbhan Singh of Bihar. In 1996 M/s. Sri Prakash Shukla, Anand Pandey, Surajbhan Singh, Lalan Pandey committed murder in connection with Railway contract in which he (Rajan Tiwary) was also implicated as he had connections with them. In the last month of the year 1996 Sri Prakash Shukla, Anand Pandey, Surajbhan Singh, Lalan Pandey shot at Ex-M.L.A., Birendra Kumar Sahi, who escaped the assault. His driver, however, was killed. On 31.3.1997 aforesaid persons killed Birendra Kumar Sahi. In both the aforesaid incidents his (Rajan Tiwary) name was also involved, although he was at his village after the death of his grand-mother. In 1998 Sri Prakash Shukla, Anand Pandey, Satwant Rai and one Tiwary(Sudhari) resorted to firing in Dahleez Hotel, Lucknow from A.K.-47 in which Vivek Shukla was killed and Bhanu Mishra leader of Shiv Sena party injured. He (Rajan Tiwary) was also implicated in the said incident as he was absconder. Later Anand Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 16 Pandey, Bablu Tiwary, Hriday Chand Jaiswal snatched Esteem Car in Banaras and resorted to firing in which also, he (Rajan Tiwary) was implicated. On account of fear from the police he (Rajan Tiwary) began to reside at his maternal house in Bihar. In the meantime, Sri Prakash Shukla abducted one Rastogi from Lucknow and in the said case also he (Rajan Tiwary) was implicated. In December, 1997 Devendra Nath, M.L.A., Bihar introduced him (Rajan Tiwary) to Pappu Yadav and to assume air of importance introduced him(Rajan Tiwary) as a veteran criminal. Pappu Yadav lost the election. He (Pappu Yadav) had animosity with Ajit Sarkar as both were Mafia. In the month of May, 1998 Pappu Yadav sent him (Rajan Tiwary) along with M/s. Raju Yadav, Rajendra Yadav and Gopal Yadav to eliminate Ajit Sarkar but he(Rajan Tiwary) came back from the way and informed Pappu Yadav that he(Ajit Sarkar) did not come. On 13.6.1998 Brij Bihari Prasad was killed by Sri Prakash Shukla, Anuj Pratap Singh, Sudhir Tiwary, Lalan Singh in which case also his name (Rajan Tiwary) was involved. To avoid police action he (Rajan Tiwary) went to Purnia along with Pappu Yadav. Pappu Yadav along with his men Harish Chaudhary, Anil Yadav, Amar Yadav had already chalked out a plan for elimination of Ajit Sarkar. He (Rajan Tiwary) reached the residence of Pappu Yadav the same day. He further states that even if he had not gone on the said date Pappu Yadav had to get Ajit Sarkar eliminated on that date. Rajan Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 17 Tiwary having reached Arjun Bhawan of Pappu Yadav took bath. On that date Pappu Yadav was in Delhi. Harish Chaudhary made Rajan Tiwary speak to Pappu Yadav on telephone. Pappu Yadav asked Rajan Tiwary to eliminate Ajit Sarkar and to accompany Harish Chaudhary wherever he goes as per programme which is known to Harish Chaudhary. Four persons, namely, Rajan Tiwary, Harish Chaudhary, Anil Yadav, Amar Yadav moved in Purnia district on Bullet, Yamaha motorcycle following Ambassador car of Ajit Sarkar. When the car reached the brick soling and slowed down firing was made from A.K.- 47, .455, .48 revolver. After killing Ajeet Sarkar and others he (Rajan Tiwary) and others came to the house of Pappu Yadav. Harish Chaudhary kept the arms in a bag. After the occurrence Rajan Tiwary, Amar Yadav came to Katihar. Rajan Tiwary telephoned Pappu Yadav at Delhi from P.C.O. of Naiyar by which time Pappu Yadav was already aware of the killing and asked Rajan Tiwary to go to such place where he is asked to go by his men. Later he (Rajan Tiwary) went to Siliguri and from there to Delhi and resided in the flat of Pappu Yadav. Before coming to Delhi he (Rajan Tiwary) went to Siliguri, Darjeeling and other places. At Delhi Rajan Tiwary resided in the bungalow of Pappu Yadav at 9, Harish Chandra Mathur Lane and thereafter went to Vaishno Devi, Sri Nagar along with Pappu Yadav and his wife and thereafter resided in the flat of Pappu Yadav. Pappu Yadav had Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 18 provided Rajan Tiwary with a cell phone. Later he (Rajan Tiwary) learnt that Pappu Yadav wanted to get him eliminated in encounter in collusion with the officials of the Special Task Force of U.P. Government so that entire evidence is wiped out. Having recorded the statement Rajan Tiwary stated that he wants enquiry to be made and if he is found guilty then be punished.

7. Having recorded the confessional statement of Rajan Tiwary on 22.2.1999 his custody was given to I.O., P.W. 61 who again produced Rajan Tiwary before Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi on 23.2.1999 when he was remanded to judicial custody in Tihar Jail. Black Yamaha motorcycle bearing registration No. WB72-7109 was seized on 25.2.1999 from Jogbani P.S. vide Ext. 33/2 which was recovered in abandoned condition by Jogbani P.S. on 4.7.1998. Two steel core portions of A.K. 47 bullets were recovered under memo dated 3.3.1999, Ext. 10 from Ambassador Car bearing registration No. BHK 1426 parked at Nitu da's garage, Purnea. After being lodged in Tihar Jail on 23.2.1999 Rajan Tiwary filed undated application addressed to C.M.M., Delhi informing the C.M.M. that he has been implicated in a false case by the Crime Branch of Delhi Police. Perusal of the undated application indicate that while Rajan Tiwary was in police custody he was subjected to extensive beating, torture and other third degree methods as also forced to sign various blank paper, written document Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 19 and false statements. He was also not allowed to meet anyone including press person(s). Having come to jail custody he has learnt from others about his statement which the police got published in newspaper, which is wholly false. He further informed the C.M.M., Delhi that at the instance of Sri D.P. Yadav he has not committed any crime and he has no connection with the murder of Pritam Singh and that he has not taken any money from D.P. Yadav. He is being implicated in the said case at the instance of political leaders in connivance with the police. Having informed the C.M.M., Delhi about the torture in police custody and the design to implicate him in the murder of Pritam Singh Rajan Tiwary requested the C.M.M. to ensure that he is not remanded in the said case, otherwise he is likely to be eliminated in police encounter and requested the C.M.M. to take action against those who have fabricated his statement. Aforesaid application of Rajan Tiwary was forwarded to C.M.M., Delhi by the Deputy Superintendent, Central Jail No. 5, Tihar, New Delhi under letter no. 181 dated 1.3.1999. Rajan Tiwary was produced from judicial custody before Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi on 9.3.1999 when he was represented by Sri S.A. Hashmi, Advocate and according to counsel for C.B.I. a prominent criminal lawyer of Delhi, C.M.M., Delhi, however, ordered that Superintendent, Central Jail, Tihar may arrange for transfer of Rajan Tiwary to the concerned jail for his appearance before Special Judicial Magistrate, Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 20 C.B.I., Patna on or before 23.3.1999. Rajan Tiwary was transferred to Adarsh Central Jail, Beur, Patna and produced before Special Judicial Magistrate, C.B.I. Patna on 22.3.1999 and remanded to judicial custody. Report no. 141 dated 22.3.1999, Ext. 9/1 was received under signature of Sri Rup Singh, P.W. 33 to the effect that two steel core portions recovered from the car of the deceased on 3.3.1999 were fired from 7.62 M.M. assault rifle. Call records of telephone nos. 23150, 23929 and 23446 installed at Purnea residence of Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav were received on 26.3.1999 by the C.B.I. under the signature of S.Z. Hassan, P.W. 11. Report no. 171 dated 1.4.1999, Ext. 9/2 also issued under the signature of Rup Singh, P.W. 33 was received to the effect that multiple holes found in the Ambassador Car of the deceased was caused by passage of 7.62 M.M. bullet. Having come to Patna Rajan Tiwary again filed retraction application dated 31.3.1999 and 21.4.1999 before the Special Magistrate, C.B.I., Patna. Rajan Tiwary was subjected to Test Identification Parade in Adarsh Central Jail, Beur, Patna on 1.5.1999 conducted by Sri Dharmsheel Srivastava, Judicial Magistrate, Ist Class, P.W. 17. P.W. 8 identified the suspect in 5th attempt as would appear from the memorandum dated 3.5.1999, Ext. 7 prepared by the T.I. Magistrate, P.W. 17. C.B.I. submitted charge sheet no. 01 on 10.5.1999 before the Special Magistrate, C.B.I., Patna finding the accusation made against the appellant Anil Yadav and Rajan Tiwary Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 21 to be true. Another T.I.P. was arranged on 12.5.1999 which was conducted by Sri Ravindra Patwari, Judicial Magistrate, Ist Class, P.W. 13 vide T.I. chart, Ext. 6 in which P.Ws. 9 and 10 identified Rajan Tiwary vide T.I. chart Ext. 6. Appellant Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav was arrested on 23.5.1999. C.B.I. Magistrate took cognizance of the offence under order dated 16.7.1999 in the light of the charge sheet dated 10.5.1999 and summoned the accused to face trial. C.B.I. filed supplementary charge sheet no. 04 on 19.8.1999 finding the accusation true against appellant Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav. I.O. C.B.I., P.W. 61 also filed separate application dated 15.9.1999 for discharge of accused sent up for trial by the Bihar police under charge sheet dated 20/21.9.1998. Special Magistrate, C.B.I., Patna under order dated 15.9.1999 discharged the accused sent up for trial by the Bihar police under charge sheet dated 20-21.9.1998. Additional Sessions Judge-XI cum C.B.I. Court, Patna under order dated 19.08.2000 framed common charges separately against the three appellants. Against Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav charge was framed for the offences under Sections 302/34, 307/34, 120-B read with Sections 302, 307 I.P.C. and Section 27 of the Arms Act. Against Anil Yadav charge was framed under Sections 302/34, 307/34, 120-B read with 302, 307 I.P.C. and Section 27 of the Arms Act. Against Rajan Tiwary charge was framed under Sections 302/34, 307/34, 120-B read with 302, 307 I.P.C. and Section Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 22 27 of the Arms Act. The other two accused i.e. Harish Chaudhary and Amar Yadav remained absconding and their trial was segregated. Additional Sessions Judge-XI cum C.B.I. Court, Patna received on 7.1.2002 the entire case records of K. Hat P.S. Case No.230/98 from the court of C.J.M., Purnea in compliance of the order of the High Court dated 11.12.2001 passed in Cr. Rev. No.883 of 2001.

8. In support of the prosecution case following 61 witnesses have been examined. Pratap Yadav P.W. 1, Rasik Hembram P.W. 2, Priyank Mittal P.W. 3, Birendra Prasad Sharma P.W. 4, Bhuneshwar Lal Das P.W. 5, Ramashray Rajak P.W. 6, Ravindra Nath Singh, P.W. 7, Kalyan Chandra Sarkar P.W. 8, Madhusudan Rishi P.W. 9, Lal Bahadur Oraon P.W. 10, S.Z. Hassan P.W. 11, K.K. Naiyar P.W. 12, Ravindra Patwari P.W. 13, Sunil Kumar Singh P.W. 14, Domai Thakur P.W. 15, Shambhoo Prasad Mehta P.W. 16, Dharmsheel Shrivastava P.W. 17, Shailendra Kumar Jha P.W. 18, Ranu Kumar Singh P.W. 19, Subodh Yadava P.W. 20, Rajendra Prasad Goswami P.W. 21, Noor Mohammad P.W. 22, Upendra Shukla P.W. 23, R.K.P. Verma P.W. 24, Ramesh Oraon P.W. 25, Manoj Chaudhary P.W. 26, Mahesh Kumar Malkani P.W. 27, Abhijit Day P.W. 28, B.K. Bhardwaj P.W. 29, A.D.K. Dhand P.W. 30, Dr. Manindra Kumar Singh P.W. 31, Dr. Basant Kumar Sinha P.W. 32, Rup Singh P.W. 33, Rajiva Acharya P.W. 34, Arunmay Samddar P.W. 35, Dinesh Yadava P.W. 36, Uttam Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 23 Sinha P.W. 37, Swapan Kumar Chandra P.W. 38, Gurnam Singh alias Name Singh P.W. 39, Sanjay Kumar alias Sanjay Upadhya P.W. 40, Kunda Singh P.W. 41, Raju Parihar P.W. 42, Manotosh Maitro, P.W. 43, Babul Datta P.W. 44, Shivanath Ghosh P.W. 45, Dilip Kumar Singh P.W. 46, Divya Prakash P.W. 47, Pankaj Kumar Yadav P.W. 48, Chandradeep Sharma P.W. 49, Dr. R.D. Raman P.W. 50, Dr. Durga Nand Mehta P.W. 51, Om Prakash Ramnani P.W. 52, Sukhvindra Singh P.W. 53, Hansraj Pamnani P.W. 54, Pradeep Sarkar alias Fatka P.W. 55, Arvind Kumar Jha P.W. 56, M.L. Meena P.W. 57, Rajiv Chandrola P.W. 58, Gurdeep Singh Saini Saini P.W. 59, Shiva Charan P.W. 60 and Narendra Singh Kharayat P.W. 61. Sub-Inspector Palvinder Singh Chahal of Delhi Police has been examined as court witness no.1. P.Ws. 1, 2, 21, 22, 23, 24, 26, 27, 34, 35, 36, 37, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 45, 46, 48, 54 and 55 have been declared hostile. Priyank Mittal, P.W. 3 is the author of letter, Ext. 1/2 wherefrom it appears that Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav was allotted quarter during the period between 17.01.1997-21.09.1998 in Harish Chandra Mathur Lane. Birendra Prasad Sharma, P.W. 4 is the brother of deceased Hirendra Sharma and has been tendered for cross-examinaton as he stated about the C.B.I. attrocity, influence and highhandedness for supporting the prosecution case. Bhuneshwar Lal Das, P.W. 5 is the author of letter dated 23.10.1998, Ext. 2 indicating election details of appellant Rajesh Ranjan Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 24 in response to the information sought by the C.B.I. Ramashray Rajak, P.W. 6 at the relevant time served as Sub-Divisional Engineer (Telephone), Katihar who has furnished print out of Katihar telephone booth No. 34679 and telephone no. 33611, Exts. 3, 4. Ravindra Nath Singh, P.W. 7 stated that Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav and Ajit Sarkar have political rivalry. The witness further stated that he learnt from P.W. 20 through a chit dated 8.6.1998 that Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav hired Rajan Tiwary to kill Ajit Sarkar. Kalyan Chandra Sarkar, Madhusudan Rishi, Lal Bahadur Oraon, P.Ws. 8, 9, 10 are the eye witnesses of the occurrence. They have, however, disowned their statement given to the Inspector, A.K. Jha of Bihar (Purnea) police, P.W. 56 the scriber of fardbeyan of K. Hat P.S. Case No. 230/98 on the statement of informant, P.W. 8 and also further statement of the informant and statement of eye witnesses P.Ws. 9, 10 recorded in the night between 14-15.6.1998. S.Z. Hassan, P.W. 11 is the Divisional Engineer, Purnea who has issued print out of telephone nos. 23150, 23929 and 23446, Exts. 3/1, 3/2 and 3/3. K.K. Naiyar, P.W. 12 has issued telephone print out of Delhi telephone nos. 3730767 and 3736358, Exts. 3/4, 3/5 in response to letter from C.B.I. dated 5.1.1999. Ravindra Patwari, P.W. 13 is the then Judicial Magistrate, Patna who conducted Test Identification Parade on 12.5.1999 and submitted report dated 12.5.1999, Ext. 6 wherefrom it appears that Rajan Tiwary was Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 25 identified by P.Ws. 9, 10. Sunil Kumar Singh, P.W. 14 is the District Secretary of C.P.M. party who was present at the house of Ajit Sarkar on 14.6.1998 at 5.10 P.M. and has stated that it was Subhash Singh who came to the residence of Ajit Sarkar at about 5.10 P.M. and gave information about his killing. He is also witness to the dead body challan of Ajit Sarkar, material Ext. VI. Domai Thakur, Shambhoo Prasad Mehta, P.Ws. 15, 16 had come to Harda for marketing on 14.6.1998 and while sitting in the Tea shop had seen red bullet and black motorcycle taking rounds in the market. Later they also saw the two motorcycles following the white Ambassador car of Ajit Sarkar. Dharmsheel Shrivastava, P.W. 17 is another Judicial Magistrate who conducted second Test Identification Parade on 1.5.1999 and submitted report dated 3.5.1999, Ext. 7. Shailendra Kumar Jha, P.W. 18 is the Crime Reader in the office of Superintendent of Police, Purnea who has proved criminal case history of Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav dated 31.10.1998 issued under the signature of the then S.P., Purnea Sri R.S. Bhatti, Exts. 5/1, 5/2 and 5/3. Ranu Kumar Singh, P.W. 19 has his house 10-12 steps away from the place of occurrence. Having heard the sound of firing he came to the place of occurrence and is also witness to the inquest report of Ajit Sarkar. He has further stated that Kalyan Chandra Sarkar arrived 45 minutes after the occurrence and asked the persons present at the place of occurrence as to who is the assailant of his Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 26 brother and others. Subodh Yadava, P.W. 20 also heard that assailant has been hired to kill Ajit Sarkar and Dilip Yadav. Ramesh Oraon, P.W. 25 is the injured Bodyguard of Ajit Sarkar. Abhijit Day, P.W. 28 is the Head of C.F.S.L., New Delhi who submitted report Ext. 9 dated 3.3.1999 about the three fired/empty cartridges recovered from the place of occurrence. B.K. Bhardwaz, P.W. 29 has put his signature over material exhibit VII, photograph of Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav, his wife, child and Rajan Tiwary which has been marked as Ext. 1/19, 1/20. A.D.K. Anand, P.W. 30 is the witness of seizure of the photograph, material Ext. VII. Dr. Manindra Kumar Singh, P.W. 31 is the surgeon who has put his signature over the bed head ticket of injured Ramesh Oraon, P.W. 25. Dr. Basant Kumar Sinha, P.W. 32 is the doctor who conducted post mortem on the dead body of the deceased. Rup Singh, P.W. 33 is the Principal Scientific Officer who inspected the car of the deceased on 3.3.1999 and recovered two steel core portions which is disintegrated bullet part from assault rifle of 7.62 M.M. Swapan Kumar Chandra, P.W. 38 is the S.I. of West Bengal police posted at Silliguri who recorded his statement under Section 164 Cr.P.C. to disprove the alibi of Harish Chaudhary. Babul Datta, P.W. 44 the Assistant Manager, Hotel Shardhanjali has been examined to prove the guest register of Hotel Shardhanjali, column nos. 1 and 11, which is in his writing, Exts. 22, 22/1 and hotel bill book, Ext. 23. Divya Prakash, P.W. 47 is the Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 27 owner of a press and social worker. Chandradeep Sharma, P.W. 49 is the record keeper of Sadar Hospital, Purnea who has proved documents to suggest that Ramesh Oraon, P.W. 25 was treated in O.P.D. of the hospital, Ext. 24. Dr. R.D. Raman, P.W. 50 is the doctor who examined injured Ramesh Oraon. Dr. Durga Nand Mehta, P.W. 51 also attended on injured Ramesh Oraon, P.W. 25. Om Prakash Ramnani, P.W. 52 is the husband of the owner of Katihar P.C.O. No.34679. Sukhvindra Singh, P.W. 53 at the releant time was serving as Inspector in Delhi Police in whose presence R.K. Puram P.S. Case No.122/99 was registered on 12.2.1999 on the basis of the disclosure statement made by Rajan Tiwary which was recorded by Sub-Inspector Palvinder Singh in his presence. Arbind Kumar Jha, P.W. 56 is the Investigating Officer of K.Hat P.S. Case No.230/98 who recorded the fardbeyan of P.W. 8 on the basis of which K.Hat P.S. Case No.230/98 has been registered and submitted charge sheet dated 20-21.9.1998 in the court of C.J.M., Purnia. M.L. Meena, P.W. 57 is the Inspector of C.B.I. who assisted I.O. of the case, P.W. 61. Rajiv Chandrola, P.W. 58 is the Inspector of C.B.I. who also assisted the I.O. P.W. 61. Gurdeep Singh Saini Saini, P.W. 59 is the Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi who recorded the confessional statement of Rajan Tiwary. Shiva Charan, P.W. 60 is the Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi who proved the signature of Sri Guaba, C.M.M., Delhi, Ext. 36/2. Narendra Singh Khairayat, P.W. 61 is the Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 28 Investigating Officer of the case.

9. Besides the aforesaid oral evidence prosecution has produced the following documentary evidence. Ext. 1 series are signatures on various documents. Exts. 2 series, 5, 29 series are different letters. Ext. 3 series are telephone print out indicating that call of long duration made in the morning of 14.6.1998 from Delhi residence of appellant Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav to his Purnia residence. It was further pointed out with reference to Ext. 3 series that on the date of occurrence at 18 hour 16 minute 48 second call of 42 second duration and at 18 hour 18 minute and 16 second call of 32 second duration was made from Katihar P.C.O. telephone no.34679 to Delhi residence of appellant Rajesh Ranjan on telephone nos. 3730767 subscribed in the name of appellant Rajesh Ranjan and on telephone no.3736358 subscribed in the name of his wife. On the same day at 20 hour 08 minute 41 second call from same P.C.O. of one minute 26 second was made to the Gorakhpur residence of appellant Rajan Tiwary on telephone no.0551322035. Ext. 4 is telephone bill. Ext. 6 is T.I. Chart of appellant Rajan Tiwary. Ext. 7 is T.I. report. Ext. 8, 42 are the notification dated 11.8.1998, 28.9.1998 issued by the Government of Bihar and Union of India granting consent and taking over investigation of K. Hat P.S. Case No.230/98. Ext. 9 series are reports. Ext. 10 is memo. Ext. 11 is bed head ticket of injured Ramesh Oraon, P.W. 25. Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 29 Ext. 12/1 is endorsement on letter. Ext. 13 series are post mortem reports of the three deceased. Ext. 14 is writing and signature on the back of photograph. Exts. 15 and 15/1 are writing and signature. Ext. 16 is memo of arrest. Exts. 17, 18 are bond and bail bond. Ext. 19 is prosecution report. Ext. 20 is order sheet. Ext. 21 is statement under Section 164 Cr.P.C. Ext. 22 series are entry in register. Ext. 23 is hotel bill. Ext. 24 is out patient department (emergency register) indicating injuries on the person of Ramesh Oraon, P.W. 25. Ext. 25 is admission register. Ext. 26 is seizure list. Ext. 27 is fardbeyan. Ext. 28 is application. Exts. 30, 30/1 are writing and signature on supplementary case diary. Ext. 31 is formal F.I.R. Ext. 32, 33 series are seizure memo. Exts. 34 and 34/1 are signature of accused Rajan Tiwary on his confessional statement. Ext. 35 is confessional statement of accused Rajan Tiwary. Ext. 36 series are endorsement of Chief Metropolitan Magistrate and Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi on the application filed by I.O. for recording the confessional statement of Rajan Tiwary. Exts. 37, 37/1 are signatures on F.I.R., Ext. 38 series are inquest reports. Ext. 39 is search list. Ext. 40 is recovery and seizure memo. Ext. 41 is application. Exts. 43, 43/1 are disclosure statements of appellants Anil Kumar Yadav and Rajan Tiwary.

10. Besides the aforesaid documentary evidence the prosecution has also produced the following material exhibits. Ext. I, I/2 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 30 are cartridges. Ext. II is box. Ext. II/1 is sealed cloth. Exts. III to III/3 are envelopes. Exts. IV, IV/1 are sealed covers. Ext. V is hotel register. Exts. VI, VI/2 are dead body challan. Ext. VII is photograph.

11. The defence of the appellants is complete denial but they have examined 27 witnesses, namely, Prabhat Prasad Yadav D.W. 1, Amod Kumar Chaudhary D.W. 2, Jagat Jaiswal D.W. 3 Sanjay Kumar Yadava D.W. 4, Ajay Kumar D.W. 5, Shankar Yadava D.W. 6, Pawan Kumar D.W. 7, Raj Kumar Jaiswal D.W. 8, Ziaul Haq D.W. 9, Md. Nazmul Hoda D.W. 10, Arvind Prasad Yadava D.W. 11, Mani Bhushan Prasad D.W. 12, Prabhash Chandra Yadava D.W. 13, Ram Charitra Yadava D.W. 14, Md. Afaq Alam D.W. 15, Ramdeo Prasad D.W. 16, Shyamanand Yadava D.W. 17, Santosh Kumar D.W. 18, Lal Bahadur Singh D.W. 19, Kripanath Das D.W. 20, Madhumita Devi D.W. 21, Naresh Bishwas D.W. 22, Sanjay Kumar Yadava D.W. 23, Kashinath Gupta D.W. 24, Jaikant Paswan D.W. 25, Rajiv Kumar Chaudhary D.W.26 and Bhai Shamsuddin, D.W. 27.

12. Besides examining defence witnesses they have also produced the following documents. Ext. A is prescription. Ext. B is signature of Bilin Chand Sarkar on fardbeyan of K. Hat P.S. Case No.230/98. Exts. C to C/5 are information slip. Ext. D is endorsement of C.M.M. Ext. E is certified copy of F.I.R. of K. Nagar P.S. Case No.260/92. Ext. E/1 is certified copy of F.I.R. of K. Nagar P.S. Case Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 31 No. 46/93. Ext. F is certified copy of petition for judicial remand of Rajan Tiwari. Exts. F/1, F/2, F/3 and F/4 are certified copies of petitions for judicial remand of Rajan Tiwari. Ext. G is survey map of village Maranga. Ext. H is certified copy of order sheet of R.K. Puram P.S. Case No.122/99.

Submission on behalf of appellant Rajan Tiwary

13. Learned counsel for appellant Rajan Tiwary submitted that the three eye witnesses, namely, P.W. 8, 9, 10 cannot be relied upon as they are the residents of village Rani Patra, which is 7 kilometers away from the place of occurrence reached the place of occurrence 45 minutes after the occurrence, which would appear from the evidence of Ranu Kumar Singh, P.W. 19 paragraph 8 and injured Ramesh Oraon, P.W. 25 paragraphs 8, 9 and 10 that he remained at the place of occurrence for about half an hour after the occurrence and the eye witnesses were not seen by him. P.W. 25 has further stated in paragraph 2 that Subhash Singh was first to arrive at the place of occurrence and that Subhash Singh rescued him from the car. Aforesaid statement of the injured P.W. 25 contradicts the eye witnesses that they were the first to reach the place of occurrence. Sunil Kumar Singh, P.W. 14 has also corroborated Ramesh Oraon, P.W. 25 about the presence of Subhash Singh and has stated that it was Subhash Singh who gave information at the house of Ajit Sarkar about the murder at 5 P.M. According to Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 32 learned counsel for appellant Rajan Tiwary the evidence of P.Ws. 19, 25, 14 have not been challenged by the prosecution, their evidence is binding on the prosecution. Reliance in this connection was placed on the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Javed Masood and Another Vs. State of Rajasthan, AIR 2010 Supreme Court 979, paragraphs 9, 10, 13 to 16.

14. Learned counsel for the appellant Rajan Tiwary further submitted that from paragraph 8 of the evidence of Ranu Kumar Singh, P.W. 19, it would appear that when Kalyan Chandra Sarkar, P.W. 8 came to the place of occurrence after 45 minutes of the occurrence he asked as to who killed his brother and others. It is submitted with reference to the observation of the Supreme Court in the case of Govind Narain and Another Vs. State of Rajasthan, AIR 1993 Supreme Court 2457, paragraph 6 that as P.W. 8 reached the place of occurrence after 45 minutes of the occurrence and he was making enquiry as to who killed his brother, his evidence is fit to be discarded in view of the testimony of independent witness Ranu Kumar Singh, P.W. 19 paragraph 8.

15. It is further pointed out by learned counsel for appellant Rajan Tiwary that Ranu Kumar Singh, P.W. 19 and Ramesh Oraon, P.W. 25 have stated in their evidence that Ramesh Oraon P.W. 25 was sent to hospital in a tempo but as per the testimony of the three eye Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 33 witnesses, namely, P.Ws. 8, 9, 10 P.W. 25 was sent to the hospital in Ambulance along with the three dead bodies which is indicative of the fact that eye witnesses were not present when Ramesh Oraon P.W. 25 was sent to the hospital. In this connection, reliance is also placed on the evidence of Madhumita Devi, D.W. 21 daughter of Kalyan Chandra Sarkar, P.W. 8 as she has stated in her evidence that the three eye witnesses were present at Rani Patra when news of murder of her uncle reached the village. It is also submitted that no reason has been attributed to her by the prosecution for giving false evidence.

16. Learned counsel for appellant Rajan Tiwary further submitted that Kalyan Chandra Sarkar P.W. 8 has falsely denied that he lodged the fardbeyan, Ext. 27 and made case diary statements. Lodging of the fardbeyan Ext. 27 and further statements made by him has been established by Sri A.K.Jha, P.W. 56 in examination in chief. The evidence of P.W. 56 has not been challenged by the prosecution nor has any suggestion been made to him that he fabricated the fardbeyan. Moreover, Kalyan Chandra Sarkar having admitted his signature on the fardbeyan the evidence of Sri A.K. Jha is required to be accepted as earlier to making his statement before the I.O., C.B.I. on 24.10.1998 disowning his statement made before Inspector A.K. Jha, P.W. 56 on 14.6.1998 that A.K. Jha took his signature on blank paper on 15.6.1998, he never made complaint before any authority that his signature was Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 34 taken by Inspector A.K. Jha, P.W. 56 on blank paper on 15.6.1998 with date 14.6.1998 beneath his signature. The contents of the fardbeyan are detailed and it is not possible to believe that the Investigating Officer imagined those details and prepared Ext. 27. Reliance in this connection, is placed on the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Sarwan Singh and Others Vs. State of Punjab, (1976) 4 SCC 369, paragraph 8 at page 375, Kanti Kumari Roy Vs. Suresh Kumar Roy and others, AIR 1990 Supreme Court 1631, paragraph 6 and Khujji @ Surendra Tiwari Vs. State of Madhya Pradesh, (1991) 3 SCC 627, paragraph 6.

17. Learned counsel for appellant Rajan Tiwary further submitted that K.C. Sarkar, P.W. 8 has been extensively contradicted by his own statement on the basis of which fardbeyan, Ext. 27 and further statement under Section 161 Cr.P.C. was recorded by Inspector A.K. Jha, P.W. 56. In the fardbeyan and further statement P.W. 8 has stated that assailants on the motorcycle were Jawahar Yadav, Abdul Sattar, Diwakar Choudhary and Pappu Dev. Bipin Singh and 6-7 others came in a car. In court he has excluded the assailant named in the fardbeyan and substituted them by Anil Yadav, Harish Choudhary, Amar Yadav and Rajan Tiwary. Change in the name of the accused persons in the court cannot be permitted where witness makes two inconsistent statements in their evidence either at one stage or at two stages. The Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 35 testimony of such witness becomes unreliable and unworthy of credence. In absence of special circumstances no conviction can be based on the evidence of witness who has given inconsistent evidence. Reliance in this connection, is placed on the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Hallu and Others Vs. State of Madhya Pradesh, (1974) 4 SCC 300, paragraphs 6, 7, State of Haryana Vs. Gurdial Singh and Another, (1974) 4 SCC 494, paragraph 21, Suraj Mal Vs. The State (Delhi Administration), AIR 1979 Supreme Court 1408 and Ahmed Bin Salam Vs. State of Andhra Pradesh, AIR 1999 Supreme Court 1617, paragraph 5.

18. From the deposition of P.W. 8, it further appears that he has falsely denied that Purnia police did not come to the place of occurrence on 14.6.1998. He is also not to be believed because he did not inform the local police that he is an eye witness but disclosed such fact to the C.B.I. vide paragraph 7 of his evidence when C.B.I. came to investigate the case four months later. P.W. 8 is further not to be believed as he did not disclose about the incident either to the widow of Ajit Sarkar or his son, as would appear from paragraph 15 of his evidence. P.W. 8 is also not to be believed because he never lodged any complaint prior to his deposition that police has wrongly recorded his fardbeyan and case diary statements vide paragraph 7 of his deposition. P.W. 8 also did not make any complaint that Bipin Singh has wrongly Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 36 been arrested vide paragraph 2 of his evidence. It is submitted with reference to aforesaid infirmities in the evidence of P.W. 8 that P.W. 8 being the brother of the deceased, although had no motive to implicate the appellants but was persuaded to give evidence in support of the case implicating the appellants but such evidence cannot be accepted on account of infirmities noted above. Reliance in this connection is placed on the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Rambilas and others Vs. State of Madhya Pradesh, AIR 1997 Supreme Court 3954.

19. Madhusudan Rishi, P.W. 9 is also not fit to be relied as he being member of C.P.M. District Committee is highly interested in success of the prosecution. He is also not to be relied as he knew Anil Yadav, Harish Chaudhary, Amar Yadav by face and name prior to the occurrence but his failure to disclose their names to P.W. 8 renders the prosecution story false. Reliance in this connection is placed on the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Hari Nath and another Vs. State of U.P., AIR 1988 Supreme Court 345. P.W. 9 is also not to be relied as he did not disclose the local police that he is an eye witness but disclosed such fact after four months to the C.B.I. He also stands extensively contradicted in the light of his case diary statements recorded by A.K. Jha, P.W. 56. Even though P.W. 9 stated that he informed his party workers regarding identity of the assailants but not a Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 37 single party worker has been examined to corroborate him. On the contrary I.O., C.B.I., P.W. 61 stated that he could not locate any party worker to whom P.W. 9 had disclosed the name of the assailants. Aforesaid false evidence given by P.W. 9 shakes the foundation of prosecution case. Reliance in this connection has been placed on the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Sohan and another Vs. State of Haryana and another, AIR 2001 Supreme Court 1380, paragraph 28. P.W. 9 is also not to be relied as he stands contradicted by injured P.W. 25 as according to P.W. 9 injured was sent to hospital in Ambulance, which is incorrect in view of the evidence of the injured that he went to hospital in Tempo. Lastly it is submitted that P.W. 9 having not disclosed the local police soon after the incident that he is an eye witness no reliance can be placed on his evidence. Reliance in this connection, has been placed on the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of State of Orissa Vs. Mr. Brahmananda Nanda, AIR 1976 Supreme Court 2488, Bachhu Narain Singh Vs. Naresh Yadav and others, AIR 2004 Supreme Court 3055 and Ramreddy Rajeshkhanna Reddy and Anr. Vs. State of Andhra Pradesh, AIR 2006 Supreme Court 1656, paragraphs 4, 5 and 6.

20. Learned counsel for Rajan Tiwary also submitted that evidence of Lal Bahadur Oraon, P.W. 10 is also not fit to be relied as he is resident of village Rani Patra and knew the deceased Ajit Sarkar since Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 38 the childhood, which is evident from paragraph 2 of his evidence, as such, highly interested in success of the prosecution. P.W. 10 is further not to be relied as having counter-signed the fardbeyan, Ext. 27 on 14.6.1998 falsely denied such fact. P.W. 10 also new Anil Yadav, Amar Yadav and Harish Chaudhary from before but did not disclose their names to P.W. 8 vide paragraph 10 of the evidence of P.W. 8. He also did not disclose the names of the assailants to the wife of the deceased vide paragraph 10 of the evidence of P.W. 10. He also did not inform local police that he is an eye witness vide paragraph 6 and 7 of his evidence. He disclosed the fact that he is an eye witness to the occurrence one month after the incident vide paragraph 2 of his evidence. In paragraph 6 of his evidence he has stated that about 100- 150 shots were fired and that each deceased sustained about 50-60 bullet injuries, which stands contradicted by the evidence of the doctor conducting autopsy on the person of the three deceased, Dr. Basant Kumar Singh, P.W. 32 found Ajit Sarkar sustained two gun shot injuries. Asfaq Alam and Harendra Sharma sustained one gun shot injury each. It is submitted that P.W. 10 is also fit to be rejected for the reasons which have been indicated above while dealing with the evidence of P.W. 9.

21. Learned counsel for the appellant Rajan Tiwary further challenged the confessional statement made by Rajan Tiwary, Ext. 35 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 39 and submitted that I.O., P.W. 61 illegally took accused Rajan Tiwary in his custody on 13.2.1999 and kept him in wrongful confinement till 22.2.1999. During the aforesaid period Rajan Tiwary was kept incommunicado and subjected to sustained interrogation by a team of four officers, vide paragraph 57 of the evidence of I.O., P.W. 61. According to learned counsel there is no judicial order from any court directing police remand of Rajan Tiwary to P.W. 61. Realizing this illegality P.W. 61 subsequently committed forgery with judicial record, Ext. F/4 and made interpolation thereupon by writing ―received accused in muffled condition with warrant‖ and thereby committed interpolation in the judicial record, Ext. F by interpolating Ext. F/4. Reference in this connection, is made to the observations of the trial court in paragraph 41 of the impugned judgment. It is further submitted that Exts. F, F/4 were marked as defence exhibit without objection from the prosecution.

22. Learned counsel for appellant Rajan Tiwary further submitted that Rajan Tiwary remained in police custody for 9 days from 13.2.1999 till 21.2.1999 and produced in the court of Sri Saini on 22.2.1999 at 12.30 P.M. whereafter Sri Saini allowed Rajan Tiwary 45 minutes to reflect if he wishes to make confession. According to learned counsel grant of 45 minutes time to reflect is contrary to the dictum laid down by the Constitution Bench of the Apex Court. It is further submitted that confession recorded by Rajan Tiwary is further bad for Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 40 the reason that Sri Saini failed to inform Rajan Tiwary that he is a Magistrate. The confession of Rajan Tiwary is also bad for the reason that Sri Saini did not inform Rajan Tiwary that he would not be handed over to the C.B.I. if he did not make the confession. In fact, Rajan Tiwary was handed over to the C.B.I. after the confession vide evidence of I.O., P.W. 61 paragraph 176 and paragraph 25 of the evidence of P.W. 59 Magistrate recording the confession.

23. According to learned counsel for appellant Rajan Tiwary the confession is further bad for the reason that Sri Saini, P.W. 59 neither enquired from Rajan Tiwary whether he has been subjected to third degree by the police nor checked his body. The medical examination certificate of Rajan Tiwary dated 21, 22.2.1999 was not produced vide paragraph 172, 171 of the evidence of I.O., P.W. 61.

24. Learned counsel further submitted that from perusal of the order passed by Sri Saini, P.W. 59 on 22.2.1999 at 12.30 P.M. and 1.15 P.M. when Rajan Tiwary was produced before him for recording his statement, it would appear that P.W. 59 recorded his statement as Rajan Tiwary was insisting on making the confession, which is sure proof that he was coerced.

25. It is further submitted that three important pages of the confession i.e. page nos. 3, 4 and 5 has not been signed by Rajan Tiwary, as such, confession is not in accordance with law and fit to be Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 41 ignored.

26. Learned counsel also submitted that confession of Rajan Tiwary is not voluntary as before recording his confession Rajan Tiwary was identified by I.O., P.W. 61 who was standing outside the court room while Rajan Tiwary was recording his confession and after the confession was recorded Rajan Tiwary was handed over to I.O., which is evident from the evidence of P.W. 59, paragraphs 17, 29, 32. In view of the submissions noted in paragraphs 22 above, it is submitted that Rajan Tiwary having not been allowed at least 24 hours time for reflection the confession recorded by him on 22.2.1999 at his insistence is wholly involuntary and fit to be rejected in view of the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Kartar Singh Vs. State of Punjab, (1994) 3 SCC 569, paragraph 390 at page 727 and Sarwan Singh Rattan Singh Vs. State of Punjab, AIR 1957 Supreme Court 637, paragraph 10.

27. It is further submitted that prolonged police (C.B.I.) custody is conclusive proof of coercion. Reference in this connection is made to the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Nathu Vs. State of Uttar Pradesh, AIR 1956 Supreme Court 56, paragraph 6.

28. Counsel for appellant Rajan Tiwary further submitted that confession recorded by Rajan Tiwary cannot be relied upon as his confession was recorded without observing the safeguard provided in Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 42 Sub-sections (2), (3) of Section 164 Cr.P.C. and Rule 7 of the Delhi High Court Rules. Reliance in this connection is placed on the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Rabindra Kumar Pal @ Dara Singh Vs. Republic of India, AIR 2011 Supreme Court 1436, paragraphs 23 to 33, Dhanajaya Reddy Vs. State of Karnataka, (2001) 4 SCC 9, paragraphs 17 to 24. With reference to the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Dhanajaya Reddy(supra) and Rabindra Kumar Pal (supra) learned counsel for Rajan Tiwary submitted that the first precaution which the Judicial Magistrate recording 164 Cr.P.C. statement of the accused is required to take is to prevent forcible extraction of confession by the prosecuting agency by ensuring that the safeguards provided under Sub-Clauses (2), (3) and (4) of Section 164 Cr.P.C. are observed not only in form but in substance. Before proceeding to record the confessional statement a searching enquiry must be made by the Magistrate from the accused as to the custody from which he was produced and the treatment he had been receiving in such custody to ensure that there is no scope for doubt of any sort of extraneous influence, proceeding from a source interested in the prosecution still lurking in the mind of an accused. The Magistrate in particular should ask the accused as to why he wants to make a statement which surely shall go against his interest in the trial, even if he contrives subsequently to retract the confession. The accused willing Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 43 to record confession should be granted sufficient time for reflection. During the time of reflection the accused should be completely out of police influence. The Judicial Officer who is entrusted with the duty of recording confession must apply his judicial mind to ascertain and satisfy his conscience that the statement of the accused is not on account of any extraneous influence on him. He should also be assured of protection from any sort of apprehended torture or pressure from the police, in case, he declines to make a confessional statement and be given the assurance that even if he declined to make the confession he shall not be remanded to police custody. Judicial confession should be recorded in question and answer form, which is the manner indicated in the criminal court rules. At the time of recording of the statement of the accused no policeman or officer shall remain present in the court/chamber where the statement is recorded. Having recorded the confession signature of the officer and the accused be obtained on the confession as per the requirement of Sub-Section-(5) of Section 281 referred to in Sub-Clause-(4) of Section 164 Cr.P.C. It is also submitted that the failure of the Magistrate to put searching questions from which he could ascertain the voluntary nature of the confession detracts so materially from the evidentiary value of the confession of an accused that it would not be safe to act upon the same. It is submitted that in the instant case, Sri Saini, P.W. 59 before recording the confession of Rajan Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 44 Tiwary did not ascertain from him the custody from which he has been produced and the treatment which he has been receiving in such custody. He also did not inform Rajan Tiwary that in case he does not wish to make the confession he shall not be remanded to the custody of C.B.I. from which he has been produced. It is also submitted that after recording of the confession of Rajan Tiwary his signature was not obtained on pages 3 to 5 of the confession as is required under Sub- Section (5) of Section 281 Cr.P.C. referred to in Sub-Section (4) of Section 164 Cr.P.C. thereby the contents of pages 3 to 5 of the confession, Ext. 35 cannot be relied upon by the prosecution in support of the charges levelled against him. Having recorded the confession Rajan Tiwary was again remanded to police (C.B.I.) custody, which is clear violation of Rule 7 of the Delhi High Court Rules and for such violation also confession is fit to be rejected.

29. Learned counsel for appellant Rajan Tiwary has further submitted that the confession recorded by Rajan Tiwary, Ext. 35 is not a confession at all. In case, this Court concludes that confession of Rajan Tiwary is a confession the same having been retracted under undated petition addressed to Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi and forwarded by the office of the Superintendent, Central Jail No.5, Tihar, New Delhi to ADJ cum Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Tis Hazari Court, Delhi under Memo No. 181 dated 1.3.1999, petition dated Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 45 30.3.1999, another petition addressed to Special Magistrate, C.B.I., Patna and forwarded by Superintendent, Beur Jail, Patna under Memo No. 1016 dated 30.3.1999, petition dated 21.4.1999 filed through lawyer giving reference of retraction dated 30.3.1999, the contents of the confession, Ext. 35 is required to be corroborated with reference to the evidence led by the prosecution.

30. Learned counsel for appellant Rajan Tiwary has further submitted that telephone print outs, Ext. 3 series cannot be relied upon as evidence in support of the prosecution case. Information given under the print out has not been signed by a person occupying a responsible official position in relation to the operation of the telephone exchange or the management of the telephone company, as is required under Section 65-B of the Evidence Act. It is further submitted that the telephone print out having been issued under the signature of Ramashray Rajak, Sub- Divisional Officer, Phones, Katihar, P.W. 6 and K.K. Naiyar, Sub- Divisional Officer, Vigilance, MTNL, P.W. 12 the same cannot be relied upon as P.Ws. 6, 12 are neither the Incharge of telephone exchange from which the print outs have been issued nor they have any control over the management of the telephone company.

31. Learned counsel for appellant Rajan Tiwary has finally submitted that C.B.I. investigation in the present case is wholly without jurisdiction as after submission of the charge sheet dated 20/21.9.1998 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 46 by Purnia police in K. Hat P.S. Case No. 230/98 registered for the offence of murder of Ajit Sarkar and others, C.J.M., Purnia had taken cognizance under order dated 23.9.1998 for the offences referred to in the charge sheet and summoned the accused sent up for trial, matter being subjudice de novo investigation by the C.B.I. could not have been made without the permission of C.J.M., Purnia. In support of the aforesaid plea learned counsel for appellant Rajan Tiwary relied on the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of T.T. Antony Vs. State of Kerala and others, AIR 2001 SC 2637, Rama Chaudhary Vs. State of Bihar, AIR 2009 SC 2308 and Vinay Teyagi Vs. Irshad Ali @ Deepak and others., 2013 CRI.L.J. 754.

Submission on behalf of appellant Anil Kr. Yadav

32. Learned counsel for appellant Anil Kumar Yadav has adopted the submissions made on behalf of appellant Rajan Tiwary. He has further submitted that Anil Yadav is not named as accused in the fardbeyan/ F.I.R. of K. Hat P.S. Case No.230/98 Exts. 27, 31 which has been recorded/ registered on the basis of the statement of P.W. 8. It is further stated that Anil Yadav is also not named in F.I.R. of R.C. Case No.12(S)/98 dated 12.10.1998. Counsel for Anil Yadav further submitted that the informant, P.W. 8 did name Anil Yadav in his statement recorded by I.O. of C.B.I., P.W. 61 as also in court that the appellant Anil Yadav and others including the two appellants came to Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 47 the place of occurrence and kept the red bullet motorcycle in start position to facilitate the escape of the assailants. Learned counsel has further submitted that appellant Anil Yadav has neither motive nor mens rea to kill Ajit Sarkar and others, as such, the evidence recorded by P.W. 8 in court is fit to be rejected as such evidence was never recorded by him before the I.O. of State police and statement to the contrary made after four months of the occurrence cannot be relied upon. With reference to the evidence of Ranu Kumar Singh, P.W. 19 learned counsel submitted that P.W. 19 has stated in paragraph 2 of his cross- examination that Kalyan Chand Sarkar, P.W. 8 came to the place of occurrence after 45 minutes of his arrival and was loudly asking as to who killed his brother. Witness in the same paragraph states that injured Ramesh Oraon, P.W. 25 was sent to the hospital in Tempo contrary to the claim of P.W. 8.

33. Learned counsel for appellant Anil Yadav further submitted that Madhusudan Rishi P.W. 9 claimed that he saw the occurrence from 100-150 yards and identified the appellant Anil Yadav as the one who was driving red bullet motorcycle over which Harish Chaudhary was pillion rider. He identified Anil Yadav as he was local person and was always seen with Pappu Yadav during electioneering. P.W. 9 also claimed to have identified Harish Chaudhary as he was regular companion of Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav though he is not Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 48 presently present in court. P.W. 9 also identified Rajan Tiwary who had come to the place of occurrence on black motorcycle as he had seen him several times during 1998 election. Anil Yadav had kept the motorcycle in start position. Harish Chaudhary, Amar Yadav and Rajan Tiwary resorted to firing. Rajan Tiwary confirmed the death of M.L.A. Sahab by touching his body and thereafter Rajan Tiwary kick start the motorcycle and took Amar Yadav as his pillion rider and went away. Harish Choudhary became the pillion rider of Anil Yadav. Both the motorcycles went towards Congress Office.

34. Learned counsel for Anil Yadav challenged the evidence of Madhusudan Rishi, P.W. 9 on the ground that he for the first time in court after five years of the occurrence stated that he being a local person recognized appellant Anil Yadav as he had seen him along with Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav during eletion campaign. Aforesaid deposition according to learned counsel is fit to be rejected in view of the evidence of P.Ws. 56, 61 vide paragraphs 171, 201 of P.W. 56 and paragraph 106 of P.W. 61 that P.W. 9 never stated such fact before either P.W. 56 or P.W. 61.

35. Learned counsel for appellant Anil Yadav further submitted that Lal Bahadur Oraon, P.W. 10 also identified Anil Yadav as the one who came to the place of occurrence driving red bullet motorcycle with Harish Choudhary sitting as pillion rider. He also Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 49 claimed that black motorcycle was driven by Amar Yadav and a tall man with arm was his pillion rider. He also stated that he could identify Anil Yadav as he had seen him along with Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav during election campaign. P.W. 10 further stated that local police arrived at the place of occurrence after 15-20 minutes of the occurrence but he is not aware as to how long the police remained at the place of occurrence. P.W. 10 further confirmed that he did not infirm the local police about the name of the assailants including the fact that he new the assailants from the time of election. He further stated that he never gave any application to the local police that he is an eye witness of the occurrence. Learned counsel further pointed out towards the evidence of P.W. 10 in paragraph 7 that he signed his statement given to the local police in connection with post mortem of the deceased on 15.6.1998 without reading the same. He further pointed out towards the evidence of P.W. 10 in the same paragraph that the witness had not informed the superior officers of the Bihar Police in writing that local police had obtained his signature on blank paper.

36. Learned counsel for appellant Anil Yadav challenged the evidence of Lal Bahadur Oraon, P.W. 10 that he identified Anil Yadav from before as he had seen him earlier during election campaign of Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav as has been claimed by P.W. 10 in paragraph 1 of the examination in chief but such statement was not Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 50 made by the witness while recording his statement before the I.O. of local police, P.W. 56, which is evident from paragraphs 173, 202 of the evidence of P.W. 56 as P.W. 56 claimed in those paragraph that P.W. 10 neither named Anil Yadav in his statement nor claimed that he identified him from before as he had seen him during election campaign of Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav. In this regard learned counsel for appellant Anil Yadav also referred to the evidence of P.W. 61, paragraph 107 where P.W. 61 accepted that P.W. 10 had not stated before him that he had seen Anil Yadav and Amar Yadav moving along with Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav during his election campaign.

36(a). Learned counsel with reference to the evidence of Ramesh Oraon, P.W. 25 paragraph 3 submitted that he remained at the place of occurrence for about 20-25 minutes after the occurrence but until he was taken from the place of occurrence in tempo P.Ws. 8, 9 and 10 did not come to the place of occurrence.

37. Learned counsel for Anil Yadav further submitted that in the light of the evidence of independent witnesses P.Ws. 19, 25, 48 and 56 P.Ws. 8, 9 and 10 cannot be taken as reliable eye witnesses of the occurrence. Learned counsel also submitted that from the evidence of P.W. 56 paragraphs 200, 201 and 202 it would appear that the three eye witnesses P.Ws. 8, 9 and 10 did not name Anil Yadav as the one who on the date and time of occurrence had come to the place of Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 51 occurrence for executing the conspiracy and assisted the assailants in making good their escape from the place of occurrence on motorcycle by keeping the red bullet motorcycle in start position.

38. Learned counsel with reference to the evidence of Domai Thakur and Shambhoo Prasad Mehta, P.Ws. 15 and 16 submitted that both the witnesses had seen Anil Yadav, Harish Chaudhary, Amar Yadav and one unknown in Harda market over read bullet and black motorcycle taking rounds of the market in the afternoon prior to the occurrence. They also saw the two motorcycles following the white Ambassador car of the deceased Ajit Sarkar from Harda market.

39. Learned counsel for Anil Yadav also challenged the evidence of Domai Thakur and Shambhoo Prasad Mehta, P.Ws. 15, 16 on the ground that they falsely stated in their examination in chief that on the date of occurrence they had seen Anil Yadav taking rounds on red bullet motorcycle with pillion Harish Chaudhary in Harda market and thereafter followed the car of the deceased as they recognized both Anil Yadav and Harish Chaudhary from before i.e. time of election campaign of Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav. According to learned counsel aforesaid deposition of P.Ws. 15, 16 has been made for the first time in court after more than five years of the occurrence, which is evident from paragraphs 109, 289 of P.W. 61 who has categorically Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 52 stated that such statement was never made before him while he recorded the statement of P.Ws. 15, 16 during investigation.

40. Learned counsel with reference to paragraph 173 of the evidence of A.K. Jha, P.W. 56, I.O. of K. Hat P.S. Case No.230/98 submitted that witness Lal Bahadur Oraon, P.W. 10 has not stated before him (P.W. 56) that Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav calls Harish Chaudhary as Mama. P.W. 10 further did not state before P.W. 56 that during election he had seen Anil Yadav along with Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav. P.W. 10 has also not stated before P.W. 56 that he had seen Amar Yadav together with Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav during election campaign. P.W. 10 had also not stated before P.W. 56 that Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav during election speech had stated that in the event he wins the election he shall assault Ajit Sarkar by entering his house and in case, he loses the election he will assault Ajit Sarkar on the road. With reference to paragraph 174 of the evidence of P.W. 56 learned counsel submitted that during election campaign while delivering street corner speech Jawahar Yadav and Abdul Sattar had stated in village Rani Patra that in case Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav will win the election the M.L.A. shall be assaulted in his house and in case, he loses the election then on road. With reference to the evidence of P.W. 56 in paragraph 200, 201, 202 learned counsel for appellant Anil Yadav submitted that neither P.W. 8 nor P.W. 9 nor P.W. 10 had named Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 53 Anil Yadav in their statement given to P.W. 56 as the one who was involved in the murder of Ajit Sarkar and two others.

41. Learned counsel for Anil Yadav with reference to the evidence of P.W. 61 paragraphs 227, 254 to 268, 271 to 275, 280 to 290 submitted that the prosecution case put forth by P.Ws. 8 to 10, 15 and 16 is fit to be rejected as the version put forward by those witnesses implicating Anil Yadav was not stated by those witnesses before the I.O., P.W.61. P.Ws. 9, 10 named Anil Yadav for the first time before P.W. 61 vide paragraphs 256, 258. Aforesaid version has been put forward by the witnesses for the first time in court and to deliberately conceal the innocence of appellant Anil Yadav his statement recorded under Section 164 Cr.P.C. has not been brought on record. It is further submitted on behalf of Anil Yadav that red bullet motorcycle was not seized from his house as he never owned/possessed any motorcycle. According to learned counsel the oral evidence of the prosecution that Anil Yadav possessed red bullet motorcycle is hit by Section 59 of the Evidence Act in absence of any documentary proof showing his ownership of the red bullet motorcycle, which was never put on T.I. Parade for identification. Reference in this connection is also made to the evidence of D.Ws. 5 and 11. Learned counsel for Anil Yadav submitted that story of recovery of red bullet motorcycle is not true as the said motorcycle was neither produced before the C.J.M., Purnea nor Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 54 before the trial court and recovery memo, Exts. 40, 43 was admitted in evidence with objection which is a weak evidence and hit by Sections 24, 25, 26 of the Evidence Act.

42. Learned counsel with reference to paragraphs 227, 228 of the evidence of N.H. Kharaiyat, P.W. 61 (I.O.) submitted that P.W. 9 had not stated before him that Anil Yadav kept the motorcycle in start position and Amar Yadav, Harish Chaudhary, Rajan Tiwary resorted to firing. He also did not state before him that Rajan Tiwary having confirmed the death of Ajit Sarkar by touching his body kick start the motorcycle over which Amar Yadav sat as pillion rider, Harish Chaudhary became the pillion rider of Anil Yadav and the two motorcycle escaped through Krishna Ashram road over which Congress office is also situated.

43. Learned counsel for appellant Anil Yadav further submitted with reference to paragraphs 27, 283 of the evidence of P.W. 61 that confessional statement of Anil Yadav was also recorded on 26.2.1999 under Section 164 Cr.P.C. by Mrs. Santosh Sneh Mann, Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi but the said statement has not been cited as evidence in the charge sheet.

44. Learned counsel further submitted that red bullet motorcycle said to have been used in the crime and recovered from the verandah of the house of Anil Yadav on 18.2.1999 vide two disclosure Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 55 memo, both dated 18.2.1999, Exts. 43, 43/1 and pointing out cum recovery and seizure memo dated 18.2.1999, Ext. 40 admitted in evidence with objection. The motorcycle having not been produced in court and the two independent witnesses of the disclosure memo, namely, Upendra Shukla and P.K. Verma officer of the State Bank of India, P.Ws. 23, 24 having stated in their evidence that it is incorrect to say that disclosure memo was prepared in their presence and they signed the same on 18.2.1999 the memo cannot be relied upon. The pointing out cum recovery and seizure memo Ext. 40 admitted in evidence with objection can also not be relied upon as the two independent witnesses to the said pointing out cum recovery and seizure memo, namely, Umesh Mishra and Shiv Shankar Prasad, Telecom Technical Assistant and Junior Telecom Officer in the office of S.D.O. Phones and Telecom District Manager, Katihar having not been examined there is no authenticity of the contents of the said pointing out memo. In this connection, reliance is also placed on the evidence of P.W. 61 in paragraph 261 onwards wherefrom it will appear that Anil Yadav was arrested on 17.2.1999 after he was called from his village home through one Prabhakar Yadav his distant relative at circuit house by Inspector A.K. Gupta, though prior to his arrest his house was searched but nothing incriminating was found. In support of the aforesaid contention learned counsel for appellant Anil Yadav relied on the judgment of this Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 56 Court in the case of State of Bihar Vs. Surendra Manjhi and Anr., 2010 CRI. L. J. 292, Vijay Singh Vs. State of M.P., 2005 CRI. L. J.

299. Submission on behalf of appellant Rajesh Ranjan

45. Learned counsel for appellant Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav besides adopting the submission made on behalf of Rajan Tiwary submitted that C.B.I. ought to have filed its further report in K.Hat P.S. Case No.230/98 in the court of C.J.M., Purnea as per sub-section (1) of Section 4, 26 and sub-seciton (8) of Section 173 of Cr.P.C. but in any case after receipt of the records of K. Hat P.S. Case No. 230/98 in the C.B.I. Court on 7.1.2002 the C.B.I. Court ought to have tried the accused sent up for trial by Purnea police under charge sheet dated 20/21.9.1998 together with the accused sent up for trial by the C.B.I. under charge sheet no. 01, supplementary charge sheet no. 04 dated 10.5.1999/ 19.8.1999 in accordance with law. The C.B.I. did favour the accused persons charge-sheeted by Purnea police as it recommended for their discharge in the charge sheet dated 10.5.1999 as also filed separate application dated 15.9.1999 for their discharge in the court of Special Judicial Magistrate, C.B.I., Patna on the basis of which Special Judicial Magistrate, C.B.I., Patna passed order dated 15.9.1999 discharging the accused sent up for trail by Purnea police in connection with K. Hat P.S. Case No.230/98, which is wholly illegal and contrary to the provisions Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 57 contained in Section 186 Cr.P.C. According to learned counsel the Additional Sessions Judge XI cum C.B.I. Court, Patna ought to have conducted the trial of the accused persons sent up for trial by Purnea police under charge sheet dated 20.9.1998 together with the accused sent up for trial by the C.B.I. under charge sheet/ supplementary charge sheet dated 10.5.1999/ 19.8.1999 after receipt of the records of K. Hat P.S. Case No. 230/98 by the C.B.I. Court on 7.1.2002 in the light of Section 186 Cr.P.C. Additional Sessions Judge XI cum C.B.I. Court, Patna having not tried the accused sent up for trial by Purnea police in K. Hat P.S. Case No.230/98 under charge sheet dated 20/21.9.1998 together with the accused sent up for trial by the C.B.I. under charge sheet/ supplementary charge sheet dated 10.5.1999/ 19.8.1999 the trial conducted by the Additional Sessions Judge XI cum C.B.I. Court, Patna of the accused sent up for trial under charge sheet/ supplementary charge sheet submitted by the C.B.I. is nothing but abuse of the process of the court at the hands of C.B.I. and serious failure of justice has been caused by the prosecution to the appellants. The trial of the appellants is neither free nor fair. It is submitted that no man shall be prejudiced by the act of court or prosecution, which is well settled principle of law. According to learned counsel in the instant case C.B.I. and its prosecutor willfully favoured the accused persons sent up for trial by Purnea police by withholding the statement of prosecution witnesses recorded by P.W. 56 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 58 and thereby caused serious prejudice to the case of the appellants.

46. Reliance in this connection has been placed over the judgment of the Suprerme Court in the case of Association for Protection of Public Rights and Interest through its Secretary Vs. State of Bihar and others, 1990 CRI. L.J. 1928, paragraphs 35, 36, Balbir Vs. State of Haryana and Another, (2000) 1 SCC 285, T.T. Anthony Vs. State of Kerala and others, AIR 2001 SC 2637, Vinay Tiyagi Vs. Irshad Ali @ Deepak and others, 2013 CRI. L.J. 754.

47. Learned counsel for Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav further submitted that accused in a criminal case has fundamental and legal right to receive an honest, impartial and untainted investigation and also free and fair trial as per the settled, just, fair and reasonable procedure in law in the light of the principles of natural justice as enshrined under Articles 14, 20, 21 and 22 of the Constitution as also by reading the principles enshrined in those articles in the applicable statutory laws i.e. Cr.P.C. and the Evidence Act. It is submitted that in the instant case appellant Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav neither received honest, impartial untainted and fair investigation nor received free and fair trial as per the established, fair, just and reasonable procedure in accordance with judicially settled principles of law. According to learned counsel provisions of Sections 4(1), 91, 149, 151, 154, 161, 162, 164, 169, 172, 173, 173(2), 173(8), 223, 281, 299, 310 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 59 and 317 of the Cr.P.C. were not correctly applied while conducting the investigation and subjecting the appellants to trial. He also referred to the provisions of Sections 3, 4, 8, 10, 17, 22, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 30, 31, 54, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 65-A, 65-B, 66, 101 to 104, 106, 114, 115, 136, 137, 145, 146, 154, 155, 156 and 157 of the Evidence Act and submitted that in the instant trial inadmissible and tainted evidence was received and considered by the trial court violating the aforesaid provisions.

48. To buttress the aforesaid submission learned counsel for Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav submitted that prosecution placed reliance on the confessional statement of Rajan Tiwary, Ext. 35 to convict him of the offence of hatching conspiracy with Rajan Tiwary and to kill Ajit Sarkar is violative of the constitutional protection allowed to him in part III of the Constitution vide Sub-Article (3) of Articles 20, 21 and 22 of the Constitution. He further submitted that confessional statement recorded under Section 164 Cr.P.C. can only be used against the person who has recorded his confessional statement. In this connection, learned counsel placing reliance on the 69 th report of the Law Commission of India submitted that the confession should not be relied upon against such other person(s) named in the confession as the other person(s) named in the confession had no opportunity to cross- examine the person who made the confession. In this connection, Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 60 learned counsel referred to following paragraph from the Government of the United States by Munro(Edn. 5) Page 53 quoted by the Supreme Court in the case of A. K. Gopalan Vs. State of Madras, AIR 1950 Supreme Court 27.

"The architects of 1787 built only the basement. Their descendents have kept adding walls and windows, wings and gables, pillars and porches to make a rambling structure which is not yet finished. Or, to change the metaphor, it has a fabric which, to use the words of James Russell Lowell, is still being ‗woven on the roaring loom of time.' That is what the framers of the original Constitution intended it to be. Never was it in their mind to work out a final scheme for the government of the country and stereotype it for all time. They sought merely to provide a starting point.‖
49. Learned counsel further referred to the following observation of the Supreme Court in the case of Rustum Cavasjee Cooper Vs Union of India, AIR 1970 Supreme Court 564 quoted with approval by the Supreme Court in the case of Maneka Gandhi Vs. Union of India, AIR 1978 Supreme Court 597.

―---------- it is not the object of the authority making the law impairing the right of a citizen nor the form of action Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 61 that determines the protection he can claim; it is the effect of the law and of the action upon the right which attract the jurisdiction of the Court to grant relief. If this be the true view, and we think it is, in determining the impact of State action upon constitutional guarantees which are fundamental, it follows that the extent of protection against impairment of a fundamental right is determined not by the object of the Legislature nor by the form of the action, but by its direct operation upon the individual's rights.‖ ―We are of the view that the theory that the object and form of the State acton determine the extent of protection which the aggrieved party may claim is not consistent with the constitutional scheme .......‖ and submitted that in the case of Maneka Gandhi(supra) Supreme Court has given expanded meaning to the expression deprivation of life, procedure established by law to mean that the procedure established by law for deprivation of life and liberty must not only be established by law but the procedure meant for deprivation of life and liberty must be just, fair and reasonable. It is not enough that there is in force a law which is formally enacted by a competent Legislature, which authorizes deprivation of life and liberty. The law Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 62 must be such that it is in conformity with justice, fairness and reasonableness. Confession of Rajan Tiwary if used against appellant Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav with reference to Section 30 of the Evidence Act may amount to deprive the appellant of his life and liberty by resorting to law and procedure which is neither just nor fair nor reasonable as the contents of the confession is being used against the appellant without giving him opportunity to cross-examine Rajan Tiwary. In this connection, learned counsel pointed out that cross- examination is the most powerful engine for the discovery of truth says Loyd Paul Stryker in his book ―The Effect of Law‖. Learned counsel with reference to the memorandum recorded at the foot of the confessional statement in the light of Sub-Section (4) of Section 164 Cr. P.C. submitted that while recording the confessional statement the Magistrate forewarned the maker of the confessional statement (in the instant case Rajan Tiwary) that the statement given by him may be used as evidence against him, as such, it will be wholly unfair to use such statement against any other person including the appellant Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav. In support of the aforesaid submission learned counsel also placed reliance on the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Unni Krishnan, J.P. and others Vs. State of Andhra Pradesh and others (1993) 1 SCC 645, paragraphs 19, 142, 156, 158, 159, 161, 165, State of West Bengal and others Vs. Committee for Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 63 Protection of Democratic Rights, West Bengal and Others, (2010) 3 Supreme Court Cases 571, paragraphs 47 to 50, 67 and 68, Zahira Habibulla H. Sheikh and another Vs. State of Gujarat and others, (2004) 4 Supreme Court Cases 158, paragraphs 30 to 56, 61 to 64 and Rafiq Ahmad @ Rafi Vs. State of Uttar Pradesh, (2011) 8 Supreme Court Cases 300, paragraphs 35 to 38.

50. Confession of Rajan Tiwary is further bad for the failure of the prosecution to provide him the legal aid before recording his confession. According to learned counsel aforesaid view has been taken by the Division Bench of the Guahati High Court in the case of Gendra Brahma and others Vs. The State of Assam, 1981 CRI. L. J 430 and Kuthu Goala Vs. The State of Assam, 1981 CRI. L. J. 424. In this connection he further submitted with referene to paragraphs 6, 7 fo the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Shivappa Vs. State of Karnataka (1995) 2 SCC 76 that Magistrate recording 164 Cr.P.C. statement is required to ascertain the voluntary nature of confession. The enquiry about the voluntary nature of the confession is the most significant and important part of the duty of the Magistrate. According to learned counsel in the instant case there is no enquiry to ascertain the voluntary nature of confession. Merely recording that Rajan Tiwary wants to confess is not enquiry. Learned Magistrate recording the statement has not even asked Rajan Tiwary if C.B.I. treated him well or Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 64 under what circumstances he was arrested. No lawyer was assigned to him nor was he asked if he wanted to meet any relation or friend. According to learned counsel in order to make the confession admissible as made under Section 164 Cr.P.C. by an accused against a co-accused for applying the test of voluntariness for the purpose of Section 30 of the Evidence Act, this Court needs to test at the altar of Articles 14, 20, 21 and 22 of the Constitution of India and before testing the same it must read and satisfy the requirements as a rule of law than a rule of prudence under Section 164(2) Cr.P.C. to be explained to the accused by the Magistrate before recording the confession.

i. The maker of the confession should be specifically warned before hand by the recording Magistrate the effect of making the confession that by making such a confession, both the maker and co-accused may be held guilty / liable to get applicable punishments i.e. in the nature of death, life imprisonment or lesser period with fine.

ii. The maker should also be specifically warned that at later stage his retraction in any manner may or may not be believed and he may be held to be bound by it.

iii.The maker be also specifically warned that the co- accused shall have no opportunity to cross examine him and the co-accused can be equally punished on the basis of his Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 65 confession and he will have no other chance to meet his confession at the stage of trial before the trial court. iv.The certified fair copy of the confession be provided to the maker of the confession immediately after recording the confession U / s 164 Cr. P.C. v.The fair certified copy of confession of the maker be also provided to the co-accused at the earliest.

vi.Since the confession is hit by Section 163 Cr. P.C. and S- 24 of the Evidence Act, the detailed / maximum search enquiry be pointed out to accused and every effect of involuntary and Police Impact be taken care of.

vii.After administering the aforesaid warning the Magistrate must give at least 24 hours time or more by ensuring free from police custody and only then proceed to record the confession and then the same may be allowed to be tested in the trial court and not otherwise.

51. Learned counsel further submitted without prejudiced to his aforesaid submission that it would be evidently seen that there is no sufficient and acceptable corroboration to the confession of Rajan Tiwary. He further submits that Section 164 precedes Section 30 of the Evidence Act which came into force in 1872 but Section 164 Cr.P.C. makes no reference to or envisages a confession of co-accused involving Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 66 other co-accused, as such according to learned counsel Section 164 Cr.P.C. statement should not be applicable to Section 30 of the Evidence Act nor Section 10 of the Evidence Act can be so applied readily disregarding the constitutional protection of fair procedure under Articles 14, 20, 21 and 22 of the Constitution. Learned counsel also submitted that the Supreme Court in the case of S. Arul Raja Vs. State of Tamilnadu, (2010) 8 SCC 233, paragraph 56 acquitted the accused charged with offence of conspiracy after holding that the confession of A-1 is insufficient to implicate the appellant of the conspiracy as the same is hit by Section 10 of the Evidence Act. Section 10 refers to the statement of a fellow conspirator that pertains common intention behind the act and such a statement can be used against the other conspirators. In the present case, prosecution has failed to substantiate the allegation of conspiracy against Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav and therefore he could not be under any circumstances be called a conspirator so as to attract the provisions of Section 10 of the Evidence Act. The post arrest statement of Rajan Tiwary made on 22.2.1999 after more than six months from the date of incident is hit by Section 10 of the Evidence Act as laid down by the Supreme Court in the case of S. Arul Raja(supra).

52. It is further submitted that C.B.I. prosecution has failed to produce any cogent, trustworthy, conclusive and convincing evidence on Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 67 the point of knowledge of object of conspiracy, unlawful agreement at the behest of the three appellants in trial in the light of the law laid down by the Supreme Court in the case of State through Superintendent of Police, CBI/SIT Vs. Nalini and others, (1999) 5 SCC 253, paragraphs 581 to 583 with regard to the provisions of Section 10 and 30 of the Evidence Act. With reference to the said judgment it is pointed out that a charge of conspiracy may prejudice the accused because it has forced the accused persons into a joint trial and the court may consider the entire mass of evidence against every accused. Prosecution has to produce evidence not only to show that each of the accused has knowledge of object of conspiracy but also of the agreement. In the charge of conspiracy court has to guard itself against the danger of unfairness to the accused. Introduction of evidence against some may result in the conviction of all which is to be avoided. By means of evidence in conspiracy, which is otherwise inadmissible in the trial of any other substantive offence prosecution tries to implicate the accused not only in the conspiracy itself but also in the substantive crime of the alleged conspirators. There is always difficulty in tracing the precise contribution of each member of the conspiracy but then there has to be cogent and convincing evidence against each one of the accused charged with the offence of conspiracy. It is unlawful agreement and not its accomplishment, which is the gist or essence of the crime of conspiracy. Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 68 Offence of criminal conspiracy is complete even though there is no agreement as to the means by which the purpose is to be accomplished. It is the unlawful agreement which is the gravamen of the crime of conspiracy. The unlawful agreement which amounts to a conspiracy need not be formal or express, but may be inherent and inferred from the circumstances, especially declarations, acts and conduct of the conspirators. The agreement need not be entered into by all the parties to it at the same time but may be reached by successive actions evidencing their joining of the conspiracy. It is said that a criminal conspiracy is a partnership in crime and that there is in each conspiracy a joint or mutual agency for the prosecution by a common plan. Thus if two or more persons entered into a conspiracy any act done by any of them pursuant to the agreement is in contemplation of law, the act of each of them and they are jointly responsible therefor. This means that everything said, written or done by any of the conspirators in execution or furtherance of the common purpose is deemed to have been said, done or written by each of them. This joint responsibility extends not only to what is done by any of the conspirators pursuant to the original agreement but also to collateral acts incidental to and growing out of the original purpose. A conspirator is not responsible, however, for acts done by a co- conspirator after termination of the conspiracy. The joinder of a conspiracy by anew member does not create a new conspiracy nor does Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 69 it change the status of the other conspirators, and the mere fact that conspirators individually or in group perform different tasks to a common end does not split up a conspiracy into several different conspiracies. A man may join a conspiracy by word or by deed. However, criminal responsibility for a conspiracy requires more than a merely passive attitude towards an existing conspiracy. One who commits an overt act with knowledge of the conspiracy is guilty. One who tacitly consents to the object of a conspiracy and goes along with other conspirators actually standing by while the others put the conspiracy into effect, is guilty though he intends to take no active part in the crime. In view of the law laid down in the case of Nalini(supra) learned counsel submitted that the poor qualitity of evidence as adduced during trial do not prove charge of conspiracy conclusively beyond reasonable doubt against the appellant as the evidence on the point of unlawful agreement required under Section 120A I.P.C. is not available and Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav is entitled to acquittal by granting him benefit of doubt. It is further submitted that perusal of Ext. 35 and evidence of P.W. 59 in paragraph 22 would indicate that page nos. 3, 4, 5 and 6 of Ext. 35 is in continuation which is statement of Rajan Tiwary recorded by P.W. 59. On page nos. 3, 4 and 5 witness states that he had taken the signature of Rajan Tiwary but perusal of the original of Ext. 35 does not indicate any signature of Rajan Tiwary on page nos. 3, 4 and 5 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 70 as stated by P.W. 59. P.W. 59 further deposed in court vide paragraph 95 that C.B.I. officials never approached him for making fair copy of statement of Rajan Tiwary for the purpose of supply to the accused persons. In this connection, learned counsel next submitted that Ext. 35 was produced in the trial court on 17.11.2005 through C.B.I. prosecutor but there is no explanation by the prosecution when, where and how prosecution received the so called confession Ext. 35 from the Magistrate and as there is no evidence of receipt of Ext. 35 it creates a serious doubt about the prosecution story. It is submitted that such objection was made during trial but was ignored by the trial court.

53. Learned counsel further submitted that both the Investigating Officer, P.Ws. 56 and 61 averred in their evidence that they prepared site plan or map of the so called place of occurrence but both the copies were not exhibited by the prosecution for the reasons best known to them. It is submitted that in the absence of the site plan as per the relevant law adverse inference has to be drawn against the prosecution and the benefit of doubt has to be given to the accused. Reliance in this connection is placed on the judgment of the Madhya Pradesh High in the case of Vijay Singh Vs. State of M. P., 2005 CRI. L. J. 299, paragraph 21.

54. Learned counsel for Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav further submitted that evidence of prosecution witnesses are not free from Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 71 reasonable doubt, retracted confession by Rajan Tiwary is found to be tainted and not supported by independent corroboration appellant Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav is entitled for acquittal by granting him benefit of doubt. Learned counsel also placed reliance on the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Sarwan Singh Rattan Singh Vs. State of Punjab, AIR 1957 Supreme Court 637.

55. Learned counsel for Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav further challenged the evidence of criminal antecedent of Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav with reference to the contents of Memo No.4204 dated 31.10.1998 on the ground that the author of the said letter i.e. the then Superintendent of Police, Purnea Sri R.S. Bhatti did not examine himself to support the contents of the letter dated 31.10.1998. In this connection, he referred to the evidence of P.W. 18 who having taken dictation from Sri Bhatti had typed the letter but stated in paragraph 4 of his evidence that he had no personal knowledge about the contents of the letter. Reliance in this connection is placed over the judgment in the case of Kamal Kanto Das Vs. State, AIR 1959 Calcutta 342(DB) and Babulal Bajpai Vs. The State AIR 1959 CRI. L. J. 693.

56. Learned counsel further submitted that the evidence of P.W. 18 is in the nature of hearsay which cannot be taken into account to decide the accusation made against Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav. According to learned counsel the so called criminal antecedent of Rajesh Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 72 Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav has vitiated the trial because the trial court has allowed itself to be prejudiced by the so called criminal antecedent of Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav. Reliance in this connection is placed over the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Kalyan Kumar Gogoi Vs. Ashutosh Agnihotri and another, (2011) 2 SCC 532, paragraphs 31, 33, 34, 35, 37 and 38. In this connection, learned counsel also pointed out that the so called criminal antecedent is irrelevant and inadmissible in view of Section 54 of the Evidence Act.

57. Learned counsel further challenged the evidence of P.Ws. 7, 20 on the ground that P.W. 7 in paragraph 1 of his evidence stated that on 8.6.1998 he had gone to Purnea Bar Library to meet a friend Advocate and there he learnt from an old acquaintance Subodh Yadav, P.W. 20 who gave him a written chit in which it was written that Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav had called a man named Rajan Tiwary in Purnea who is about to kill M.L.A. Dilip Yadav and C.P.M. M.L.A. Ajit Sarkar. Similar statement was also given by P.W. 20 in paragraph 1 of his evidence. It is submitted that if the two statements are true P.Ws. 7, 20 were required under law to lodge F.I.R. under Section 154 Cr.P.C. against Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav and Rajan Tiwary. Having not done so strong inference of falsehood of the said statement and chit dated 8.6.1998 has to be drawn and consequential benefit be given to the accused and suitable stricture passed as per law against P.W. 7 and also Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 73 action if any as per law be ordered against P.W. 7. According to learned counsel the chit is a document within the meaning of Section 3 of the Evidence Act. The said chit therefore, could have been proved to be admissible in evidence only in accordance with Sections 61 to 65. The evidence of said chit cannot be received/given by oral evidence under Section 59 and 60 of the Evidence Act as has been done by P.Ws. 7, 20 which is hit by Rule of hearsay evidence and is liable to be inadmissible in evidence. Reference and reliance in this connection is placed over the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Kalyan Kumar Gogoi Vs. Ashutosh Agnihotri (2011) 2 SCC 532 as also to the earlier judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Ram Das Vs. State of Maharashtra, AIR 1977 SC 1164, paragraph 7, which is quoted hereunder for ready reference :-

―When a prosecution witness deposes that he had received a letter containing the alleged threat of murder given to the deceased and that letter is in possession of the Police but the prosecution did not produce the letter in Court in spite of the direction of the Court to produce it the only reasonable inference that can be drawn would be that the letter did not contain such a threat and the letter if produced would have falsified the witness to that extent.‖
58. Learned counsel for Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav further challenged the evidence of P.Ws. 7, 20 in paragraph 1 where they have Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 74 deposed that about 6-7 days prior to the murder they heard that Ajit Sarkar and one more person would be killed. P.Ws. 7, 20 do not mentioned the name of the person who gave this information, thus evidence of P.Ws. 7, 20 is hearsay and cannot be relied upon. The statement of P.W. 7 that he informed S.P., Purnea about the murder is also hearsay evidence as S.P., Purnea has not been examined. If evidene of P.W. 7 had any elementary truth, C.B.I. would have definitely examined the then S.P. Learned counsel submitted that non-examinaton of the then S.P., Purnea even after reference through P.W. 7 either by the C.B.I. or by the court under Section 311 Cr.P.C. makes the evidence of P.W. 7, 20 concocted, false and malicious, which is liable to be excluded and adverse inference be drawn against the prosecution.
59. Learned counsel with reference to paragraph 57 of the evidence of N.S. Kharayat, P.W. 61 submitted that Rajan Tiwary was interrogated during the period between 13.2.1999 till 22.2.1999 by four officers including P.W. 61 with reference to separate questions put by the four officers to Rajan Tiwary separately which was not filed in the court but disclosure statement made by him was filed in the court. In disclosure statement Rajan Tiwary has stated about commission of crime. In the said paragraph P.W. 61 further stated that disclosure statement is as good as confessional statement. According to learned counsel the aforesaid deposition of P.W. 61 is wholly contrary to law Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 75 and violative of Section 26 of the Evidence Act and cannot be relied upon to convict appellant Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav.
60. Learned counsel for Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav further submitted that on 19.8.2006 during trial Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav made objection against Ext. 39, so called photograph, material Ext. VII and Ext. 40 but due to failure of video conference facility the trial court could not pass any order on the objecton as made by Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav which caused serious incurable prejudice to him even then the trial court refused to permit Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav to peruse the deposition of the witnesses before recording his statement under Setion 313 Cr.P.C. The trial court has failed to testify the genuiness of the so called photograph, material Ext. VII which was not even put to the appellant during his 313 Cr.P.C. statement when so recorded by the trial court on 16.11.2006. The prosecution filed supplementary charge sheet against Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav and in the said charge sheet no.4/99 he had only been provided with so called black and white Xerox copy of the photo (later material Ext. VII) and other documents. The alleged photo may also have been filed in the 10.5.1999 charge sheet submitted by P.W. 61 but the appellant had no opportunity on any occasion to see the so called photograph. The objection made only on the basis of dim, black and white Xerox copy of photograph so provided to the appellant under Section 207 Cr.P.C. This exhibit in absence of its Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 76 original Ext. M/VII is like the chit dated 8.6.1998 as referred by P.W. 7 and is inadmissible in law as it is neither a primary nor a secondary evidence in law. Reliance in this connection on the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of R.V.F. Venkatachala Gounder Vs. Arulmigu Viswesaraswami and V.P. Temple, JT 2005(11) SC 574 and The Roman Catholic Mission Vs. The State of Madras and Anr., AIR 1966 SC 1457.
61. Learned counsel for Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav with reference to the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Arun Balakrishnan Iyer and another Vs. M/s. Soni Hospital and others, AIR 2003 Madras 389 submitted that the documents being Photostat copies could not be admitted in evidence without producing the original.
The trial court has not even actually put the so called photo to the appellant during 313 statement, hence the material object, Ext. M/VII is liable to be excluded from the evidence.

62. Learned counsel for the appellant Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav challenged the seizure of two steel core portions recovered from the car of the deceased bearing Registration No.BHK 1426 on 3.3.1999 vide seizure memo, Ext. 10 and certified to be steel core portions of bullets fired from assault rifle under report dated 1.4.1999, Ext. 9/2 on the ground that Madhvi Sarkar wife of deceased Ajit Sarkar filed petition dated 19.7.1998 before C.J.M., Purnea for return of the Car Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 77 which was considered by learned C.J.M., Purnea on 25.7.1998 and after due verification the said car was handed over to Madhvi Sarkar and at her instance the car was removed from the spot to Nitu da's garage for repairs where its seat, mat were removed and kept in a cornor of the garage. No bullet, bullet pieces could be found in the car seats. It was for the prosecution to have examined Madhvi Sarkar to explain the recovery of the two steel core portions from the seat of the car made on 3.3.1999. It is wholly improper for the prosecution to connect the appellants with the alleged recovery made from the seat of the car on 3.3.1999 when admittedly car was in the garage for repairs and there is neither any known effort nor any explanation from the prosecution as to why the weapon was not recovered from any of the accused persons.

63. Learned counsel for Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav further submitted that while recording his statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C. there has been non-compliance of the provision as Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav was not asked to explain the circumstances appearing against him in the prosecution evidence. He was also not questioned generally on the case which was put up against him by the prosecution witnesses. In this connection, it is pointed out that the photograph of Rajan Tiwary and Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav, material Ext. VII and confession of Rajan Tiwary made before Delhi Court, Ext. 35 ought to have been physically shown to Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav during Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 78 his examination. In this connection, it is submitted that the records of 313 Cr.P.C. examination do not show that Ext. 35 and the so called photograph, material Ext. VII was ever shown physically to Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav and his explanation taken, the wording of questions put by the court on this point and sequence shows beyond doubt that confession, Ext. 35 or photograph were not physically shown to Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav and others which fact is also confirmed by the lawyer who appeared on behalf of appellant in the trial court. In absence of physical showing and explanation taken the photograph and confession cannot be used against any of the appellant. In case of Ext. 35 it was particularly necessary for the prosecutor to have shown the appellant Rajan Tiwary his alleged signature and asked whether the signature was his. Additionally Rajan Tiwary shoud have been asked to explain whether he accepts or not the evidence of Metropolitan Magistrate Sri Saini, P.W. 59 that Sri Saini recorded his statement Ext. 35 in his own handwriting. The handwriting of Sri Saini, P.W. 59 as well as Rajan Tiwary ought to have been shown to Rajan Tiwary. The examination has to proceed separately and topic wise about each material circumstance in terms of paragraph 8 in the case of Ajmer Singh Vs The State of Punjab (AIR 1953 SC 76), paragraph 14 of Lallu Manjhi and another Vs. State of Jharkhand (AIR 2003 SC

854) as also paragraph 1 in Machander Vs. State of Hyderabad Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 79 (AIR 1955 SC 792). In this connection, learned counsel further submitted that any violation of fair procedure is per se violative of Article 21 of the Constitution which goes to the root and vitiates the trial and cannot be redeemed by invoking Section 463, 465 Cr.P.C.

64. Learned counsel with reference to the judgment in the case of Machander(supra) submitted that Supreme Court acquitted the accused for non-compliance of Section 313 Cr.P.C. observing each material point must be put to the accused. Learned counsel for Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav submitted that Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav had objected the so called material Ext. VII during the trial on 5.11.2003, the trial court had then observed that the objection with regard to material Ext. VII will be decided at the end of the trial but the trial court neither rendered any finding on the genuineness of material Ext. VII nor did the trial court questioned Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav about material Ext. VII in his examination under Section 313 Cr.P.C. on 16.11.2006. It is further submitted that during trial on 8.11.2006 Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav requested the trial court to allow him to peruse the statement of the witnesses for one week but he trial court not only denied such opportunity to Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav but also deprived him of the opportunity to consult his lawyer on the questionnaire which was put to him for examination under Section 313 Cr.P.C. as copy of the questionnaire was not given to him Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 80 sufficiently in advance to consult his lawyer contrary to the dictim laid down by Supreme Court in Basavaraj R. Patil and others Vs. State of Karnataka and others, 2001 SCC (Crl.) 87, paragraph 33.

65. Learned counsel for appellant Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav with reference to the judgment in State of Assam Vs. Nand Kumar Singh, 1973 Cr. L.J. 521, paragraph 29 submitted that the three appellants were not put any specific question either on the confession dated 22.2.1999 or on the retraction made by Rajan Tiwary dated 1.3.1999, 30.3.1999 and 1.5.1999 which is contrary to the provision contained in Section 313 Cr.P.C. and placing reliance on the judgment of the Supreme Court in Tara Singh Vs. The State, AIR 1951 SC 441, paragraph 24, Director of Customs, Akhnoor, Jammu and Kashmir Vs. Yaspal and another, (2009) 4 SCC 769, Bharat Swain Vs. The State, 1967 CRI. L. J. 1427, paragraph 9, Shaikh Maqsood Vs. State of Maharashtra, (2009) 6 SCC 583, paragraph 9, Ashok Kumar Sharma Vs. State of Rajasthan, (2013) 2 SCC 67 and Kalpnath Rai Vs. State (through C.B.I. (1997) 8 SCC 732 submitted that for failure to follow the mandatory provision the appellants deserve acquittal.

66. Learned counsel for appellant Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav placing reliance on the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of John Pandian Vs. State represented by Inspector of Police, Tamilnadu, (2010) 14 SCC 129, paragraphs 89 to 91 and 94 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 81 submitted that neither the print outs nor the evidence of Ramashray Rajak and Om Prakash Ramnani, P.Ws. 6, 52 identified either the caller or the called or the contents of conversation, as such, according to learned counsel the same cannot be a evidence to establish conspiracy between Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav and others.

67. Learned counsel for Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav with reference to the evidence of P.W. 61 paragraph 108 submitted that Ravindra Nath Singh, P.W. 7 had not made statement before P.W. 61 during his examination under Section 161 Cr.P.C. that Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav during election speech gave threat to the deceased Ajit Sarkar as has been claimed by P.W. 7 in paragraph 1 of his evidence. The threat does not even remotely indicate that P.W. 7 heard the threat himself. P.W. 7 having not made such statement before the I.O. his evidence about the threat made in the court cannot be relied upon. Similarly evidene of Lal Bahadur Oraon, P.W. 10 about the threat extended by Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav to deceased Ajit Sarkar in his election speech is also not to be relied upon as the said witness had not stated such fact before the I.O., P.W. 61 vide paragraph 107.

68. Learned counsel for Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav with reference to the evidence of P.W. 7 pages 33, 34 of the paper book, P.W. 8 paragraph 4 page 42 submitted that landlords were angry about 1992 directives of C.P.I.(M) party whereunder Ajit Sarkar snatched 25000 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 82 acres of land from 20-25 big landlords and distributed the same to landless which caused anger amongst the big landlords who were dispossessed from their land resulting in law and order problem. In this connection reliance has also been placed on the evidence of Ramdeo Prasad and Shyamanand Yadav, D.Ws. 16, 17. According to counsel for appellant the landlords whose lands were grabbed even on the day of occurrence had immediate provocation and strongest motive to kill Ajit Sarkar. According to learned counsel it can never be the case of the prosecution nor is it the case of the prosecution that only Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav had motive to kill Ajit Sarkar. In this connetion, learned counsel placed reliance on the observations of Harold Laski in Grammer of Politics ―A man may forgive the murder of his parents.....but he will never forgive the confiscation of his property‖. It is submitted that in the light of the aforesaid evidence of P.Ws. 7, 8 P.Ws. 56, 61 both were required to investigate the rift beween landlord and deceased Ajit Sarkar but such aspect was never investigated which would be evident from paragraphs 216, 235, 237, 238, 242, 243 and 245 of the evidence of P.W. 61.

69. Learned counsel for Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav with reference to the evidence of Dr. R.D. Raman, P.W. 50 paragraph 9 submitted that Dr. Raman is totally independent of both Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav and Ajit Sarkar as he is full time medical practitioner Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 83 who has stated in the aforesaid paragraph that in his capacity as a resident of Purnea he says that there was no ill-relation between Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav and Ajit Sarkar. Similar is the evidence of Pankaj Kumar Yadav, P.W. 48 in paragraphs 67, 68, 69, 70. Learned counsel with reference to evidence of Ramesh Oraon, P.W. 25 submitted that P.W. 25 is the Bodygurad of Ajit Sarkar whose loyalty to Ajit Sarkar was never challenged, even P.W. 25 says that relation between Ajit Sarkar and Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav was cordial. This prosecution witness has not been declared hostile by C.B.I., as such, his testimony about the cordial relation between Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav and Ajit Sarkar is required to be accepted.

70. Learned counsel for Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav submitted that defence has made application to the trial court for site inspection which was opposed by the C.B.I. According to learned counsel it was necessary for the trial court to visit the place of occurrence. The trial court's rejection of defence plea for inspection of place of occurrence vide its order dated 24.7.2007 has also prejudiced the case of the defence which the prosecution ought to have conceded. This was so because the court ought to have seen whether the witnesses could see the murder from distance narrated by P.Ws. 8 to 10. The court could have appreciated how close P.W. 19 Ranu Kumar Singh was to the place of occurrence. Scene of offence is an objective fact. Not going Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 84 to the scene of offence has deprived the court of an objective assessment of P.Ws. 8 to 10 and 19 which has caused failure of justice. There is no question of the court either believing or disbelieving the scene of occurrence. In this connection reference is also made to the Memoirs of M. Hidyatullah in ―My Own Bosswell‖ (2002 reprint) to emphasise the importance of site inspection. Site inspection referred to in the Memoirs was done by the Division Bench of the Nagpur High Court comprising Mr. Justice Hemeon and Mr. Justice M. Hidyatullah. The description of the site inspection as narrated in the memoirs is quoted hereinbelow for ready reference :-

―There were a few sensational cases. Only one needs mention. An Advocate was charged with murder. A dead body was found in his house buried in a temporary and hastily constructed grave. This was the body of his friend whom he had invited by letter, as he explained, to borrow some money. The letter was a fact. The case of the Advocate was that he had suddenly to leave Nagpur and did not meet him. His friend had duly come and was met by one of his relations. They had taken drugs and the friend died of heart failure. To avoid scandal, the body was concealed till the lawyer returned but by then it was too late as discovery had taken place. The cause of death was not established even in an elaborate autopsy and there was no suggestion of foul play. Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 85 The conviction was based on the evidence of a servant who claimed to have seen the victim done to death, through a hole in the wall. Hemeon and I went to the place and looked through the hole and mapped the area visible. We agreed as to that and we got the lawyers also to verify our map. The hole was so small and so located that almost nothing of the floor area could be seen. We saw the walls and no murder was committed against the wall. The boy had deposed that the victim was strangled on the floor. The Trial Judge had believed this child witness without visiting the room. We disbelieved him and there was no other evidnce of murder except the suspicious fact of secret burial, for which also there was some explanation. This gave force to the alibi, which was strong.‖
71. Learned counsel for Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav further submitted that C.B.I. procured witnesses and established the same with reference to the evidence of P.W. 10 paragraph 5 where P.W. 10 stated that his address was given to the C.B.I. by the C.P.M. party leader whose name he does not know. He was brought before C.B.I. authorities by the party worker Narendra Singh. In the light of the aforesaid evidence it is submitted that witnesses did not come to the C.B.I. camp office for recording their statement on their own and in the process C.B.I. omitted to examine natural witness like Subhash Singh who had not only reached Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 86 the place of occurrence but was the first who informed the wife of the deceased about the occurrence and thereafter took steps to shift the injured Bodyguard Ramesh Oraon, P.W. 25 to the hospital in Tempo. Learned counsel also submitted that there has been inordinate delay in recording the 161 Cr.P.C. statement by C.B.I. as the statement of eye witnesses i.e. P.Ws. 8 to 10 was recorded on 24.10.1998, 29.10.1998 and 28.10.1998 respectively i.e. beyond four months of the occurrence without there being any explanation from P.W. 8 as to why he did not complain before the C.J.M., Purnea about the factum of his signature having been taken by P.W. 56 on blank paper as also failure of P.W. 56 to record the statement of eye witnesses i.e. 8, 9 and 10. In this connection, learned counsel submitted that Smt. Madhvi Sarkar having filed petition dated 19.7.1998 before the C.J.M. for release of the car of the deceased on which C.J.M., Purnea passed order dated 25.7.1998 after due verification, there is no plausible reason for P.Ws. 8 to 10 not to inform C.J.M., Purnea about the conduct of P.W. 56 that he had obtained signature of P.Ws. 8 and 10 on blank paper at the time of cremation of Ajit Sarkar but is neither examining the eye witnesses nor taking action against the accused persons.

72. Learned counsel for Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav submitted that in the given facts and evidence of the present case there is suspicion against Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav but suspicion cannot Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 87 be a substitute for unimpeachable evidence and unless unimpeachable evidence is available conviction cannot be maintained. Reliance in this connection is placed on the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Sarwan Singh Rattan Singh (supra), relevant paragraphs whereof is quoted hereinbelow for ready reference :-

―It is no doubt a matter of regret that a foul cold-blooded and cruel murder like the present should go unpunished. It may be as Mr. Gopal Singh strenuously urged before us that there is an element of truth in the prosecution story against both the appellants. Mr. Gopal Singh contended that, considered as a whole, the prosecution story may be true; but between ‗may be true' and ‗must be true' there is inevitably a long distance to travel and the whole of this distance must be covered by legal, reliable and unimpeachable evidence.‖
73. In this connection, learned counsel also placed reliance on the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Narendra Singh Vs. State of M.P., (2004) 10 SCC 699 and Dilip and another Vs. State of M.P., (2007) 1 SCC 450.

74. Learned counsel for Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav further submitted that in the instant trial waters of admissible and of inadmissible evidence have mixed which can neither be separated nor filtered, hence liable to be rejected in its entirety. Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 88

75. Leaned counsel further submitted that even if P.Ws. 8 to 10 are believed for sake of argument there is hardly sufficient, acceptable and admissible evidence of unlawful agreement under Section 120A of the Penal Code between Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav and the other accused persons for murder of Ajit Sarkar and others to uphold the conviction of Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav under Section 120B of the Penal Code.

76. Learned counsel for Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav next submitted that the circumstances as relied upon by the prosecution for corroboration are not such which should persuade this Court to infer guilt of Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav on cogent and firmly established true fact. The circumstances, are neither unerringly pointing towards the guilt of Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav nor are such forming chain so complete that there is not escape from the conclusion that within all human probability the conspiracy to kill Ajit Sarkar was hatched by Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav and none else. The corroborative circumstance in order to sustain conviction is neither complete nor capable of explanation of any other hypothesis than the guilt of Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav. The corroborative evidence is neither consistent with his guilt nor inconsistent with his innocence, hence, there is hardly any cogent and reliable corroboration of the confession dated 22.2.1999 which could lend support to the contents of the confession. Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 89 According to learned counsel Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav in his statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C. has explained his defence which is consistent, natural and probable and is worth credence and belief. Reliance in this connection is placed on the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Hanumant Govind Nargunkar Vs. State of M.P., AIR 1952 SC 343, paragraph 10, Gambhir Vs. State of Maharashtra, AIR 1982 SC 1157, Vidya Sagar Vs. State of U.P., AIR 1977 SC 1116, paragraph 11, State of Goa Vs. Sanjay Thakran, (2007) 3 SCC 755 and Munna Kumar Upadhyay @ Munna Upadhyaya Vs. State of Andhra Pradesh , (2012) 6 SCC 174.

77. It is further submitted on behalf of Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav that the trial court has held the appellant Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav as sole conspirator under Section 120B of the Penal Code. There is no appeal filed against the said finding of the judgment and order by the State of Bihar through C.B.I. In such circumstances, this Court may accept the said finding as final and binding upon the respondent State of Bihar through C.B.I. There cannot be any alteration of the said finding by this Court at this stage in absence of any appeal made by the State through C.B.I. challenging the said finding.

78. Learned counsel for Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav further submitted that there is no evidence to connect Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav with the conspiracy hatched to terminate Ajit Sarkar. In this Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 90 connection it is pointed out that once inadmissible evidence like Ext. 35, material Ext. VII, criminal antecedent etc. is excluded there is nothing in law to connect Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav with the offence of conspiracy. Learned counsel further pointed out that the prejudice in the mind of the trial court is inconsistent with the concept of fair trial of the accused. According to learned counsel learned trial court with no justification allowed itself to be influenced by utterly inadmissible evidence like disclosure statement, Ext. 35, photograph material Ext. VII criminal antecedent etc. The effect of such blatant illegality is that the entire trial is in violation of Article 21 of the Constitution and the learned trial court has certainly violated the mandate of just, fair and reasonable trial enshrined in Articles 14, 21, 22 of the Constitution. In this connection, reliance is placed on the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Ashok Kumar Sharma Vs. State of Rajasthan, 2013(2) SCC 67 where the Supreme Court dealing with the right of the accused under Section 50 of the N.D.P.S. Act of being searched in presence of Gazetted Officer/Magistrate observed that non-compliane of Section 50 of the N.D.P.S. Act would vitiate the entire trial. It is submitted that in the instant case failure of P.W. 59 to observe the safeguards under Sub- sections (2)(3) of Section 164 Cr.P.C. as also Rule 7 of the Delhi High Court Rules before recording the statement of Rajan Tiwary has vitiated the entire trial proceeding taken thereafter.

Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 91

79. Learned counsel for Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav further assailed the evidence of P.W. 8 in the light of his deposition in paragraph 2, pages 39, 40(top) where he categorically stated that the evidence which he recorded in court was not recorded by him before the I.O. of the local police under Section 161 Cr.P.C. He further assailed his evidence in the light of the contents of paragraph 7 at page 44 of the paper book where P.W. 8 stated that he had not given any statement before the local police on 14.6.1998 that he is an eye witness of the occurrence. He had also not given such statement on 15.6.1998 but had put signature over blank paper. Learned counsel assailed the evidence of P.W. 8 with reference to the contents of paragraph 7 of his evidence at page 45 where the witness categorically denied the suggestion that he had made any statement before Sri A.K. Jha Circle Inspector, Purnea on 14.6.1998 at 17.45 hours that he had come to the house of his brother in the morning between 7-8 A.M. and he was taking walk at about 4.30 P.M. when Madhusudan Rishi resident of Kaliganj and Lal Bahadur Rishi of Khakibari came. Witness also denied other suggestion made in this regard.

80. Learned counsel for Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav further challenged the evidence of P.W. 8 with reference to his deposition in paragraph 11 at page 49(bottom) where witness admitted that he had not shown the place from where he had seen the occurrence to any one. Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 92 Learned counsel further impeached the evidence of P.W. 8 with referene to his evidence at page 57(top), 61, 62 and 68 that the witnesses himself has admitted in paragraph 58(bottom) that he did not inform the wife and son of the deceased about the occurrence.

81. Learned counsel for Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav challenged the evidence of P.W. 9 with reference to his evidence in paragraph 5 at page 76 that he reached the place of occurrence soon after the assailants made their escape and then he touched the deceased to confirm his death.

82. Learned counsel also assailed the evidence of P.W. 10 with reference to his deposition in paragraph 6(bottom) that he and others had not disclosed about the occurrence to the local police including superior authorities, though they had come to the place of occurrence within 15- 20 minutes of the occurrence as also along with the Hon'ble Chief Minister. Learned counsel further assailed the evidence of P.W. 10 with reference to the contents of paragraph 10 at page 106, 107 where the witness has admitted that he, Kalyan Chandra Sarkar and Madhusudan Rishi were the first person who arrived at the place of occurrence and after they raised alarm others came, yet the witness and his friends did not choose to disclose the identify of the accused persons to any one on the date of occurrence. Learned counsel submitted that if the witnesses had not chosen to disclose about the occurrence to the local police Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 93 within reasonable time of the occurrence and had made their statement for the first time after four months of the occurrence before the C.B.I., such statement cannot be relied upon.

83. Learned counsel for Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav finally submitted that many prosecution witnesses have turned hostile as the witnesses have not supported the genesis of prosecution case and as per settled law by the Supreme Court in Mukhtiar Ahmed Ansari Vs. State (NCT of Delhi), AIR 2005 SC 2804, paragraphs 34, 35 and 42 the appellant may be permitted to rely on the evidence of such hostile witnesses for grant of benefit of doubt.

Submission on behalf of C.B.I.

84. Learned Additional Solicitor General of India appearing for the C.B.I. submitted that the Government of India issued notification dated 28.9.1998, Ext. 42 entrusting the investigation of K.Hat P.S. Case No.230/98 to the C.B.I. In the light of the notification dated 28.9.1998, for administrative reasons, Superintendent of Police, C.B.I. on 12.10.1998 registered RC 12(S)/98/SIC-IV/New Delhi, Ext. 31/1 incorporating the contents of the fardbeyan of K.Hat P.S. Case No.230/98. Having registered RC 12(S)/98/SIC-IV/New Delhi the same was forwarded to the competent court and was received in the court of Special Magistrate, C.B.I., Patna on 29.10.1998, meanwhile investigating team of C.B.I. having reached Purnia on 22.10.1998 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 94 informed the C.J.M., Purnia about the registration of RC 12(S)/98/SIC- IV/New Delhi and thereafter recorded the statement of M/s. Kalyan Chandra Sarkar, Madhusudan Rishi, Lal Bahudar Oraon, P.Ws. 8, 9 and 10 on 24.10.1998, 29.10.1998 and 28.10.1998 respectively. Delhi police arrested Rajan Tiwary on 12.2.1999 and produced him before Sri K.S. Mohi, Metropolitan Magistrate, Tis Hazari on 13.2.1999. Sri Mohi remanded Rajan Tiwary to judicial custody for 14 days i.e. until 26.2.1999 in connection with R.K. Puram P.S. Case No. 122/99, which is evident from application dated 13.2.1999 filed by S.I. Palvinder Singh, Special Team Crime Branch, Ext. F/4. Counsel for C.B.I., however, submitted that before Rajan Tiwary could be lodged in judicial custody in Tihar Jail pursuant to order dated 13.2.1999 passed by Sri Mohi another order was passed on the same day i.e. 13.2.1999 (Second Saturday) by Duty Magistrate on the basis of disclosure made by Rajan Tiwary to Delhi Police authorizing his custody to the C.B.I. for 10 days i.e. until 23.2.1999. In the light of the subsequent order of the Duty Magistrate I.O. of the present case, P.W. 61 received Rajan Tiwary in muffled condition with warrant and made such endorsement on the petition dated 13.2.1999 filed by S.I. Palvinder Singh, which is evident from Ext. F.

85. For better appreciation of the aforesaid submission this Court directed the learned counsel for C.B.I. to refer to the subsequent Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 95 order dated 13.2.1999 passed by the Duty Magistrate authorizing C.B.I. custody of Rajan Tiwary until 23.2.1999 from the records. Counsel then submitted that the subsequent order passed by the Duty Magistrate on 13.2.1999 may be available in the records of R.K. Puram P.S. Case No.122/99. To verify the aforesaid submission of the learned counsel this Court under order dated 12.2.2013 called for the records of R.K. Puram P.S. Case No.122/99, which was received in this Court on 18.2/2013. With the assistance of the counsel for the parties the records of R.K. Puram P.S. Case No.122/99 was examined but neither the original nor the copy of subsequent order dated 13.2.1999 passed by the Duty Magistrate authorizing the C.B.I. custody of Rajan Tiwary until 23.2.1999 was found. Learned counsel then submitted that copy of subsequent order dated 13.2.1999 may not be available in the records of R.K. Puram P.S. Case No.122/99 but copy thereof having been filed by Rajan Tiwary himself as Annexure-8 series to the supplementary affidavit filed in Cr. Misc. No.10646/2003(Rajan Tiwary Vs. State) there should not be any dispute about the existence of the said order.

86. Learned counsel for C.B.I. further submitted that C.B.I. having obtained possession of Rajan Tiwary on 13.2.1999 interrogated Rajan Tiwary who made disclosure statement vide memo dated 17.2.1999, Ext. 43/1 pointing out the manner, place of occurrence and the P.C.O. from which he informed Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 96 about the killing of Ajit Sarkar. On the same day Sri N.H. Kharaiyat, P.W. 61 searched Premise No.173, North Avenue, New Delhi in occupation of Sri Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav in presence of independent witnesses Sri A.K. Dhand, Assistant M/O Industry, Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion, Udyog Bhawan, New Delhi and Sri B.K. Bhardwaz, U.D.C., M/O Entry, Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion, Udyog Bhawan, New Delhi and recovered letter head pad of Sri Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav, Member of Parliament, four sheets blank and one coloured photograph of Mr. and Mrs. Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav, son Sarthak and one more person vide search list, Ext. 1/18, material Ext. VIII. To confirm the call referred to in the disclosure statement of Rajan Tiwary call details, Ext. 3 series were obtained.

87. Appellant Anil Kumar Yadav was arrested by the C.B.I. on 17.2.1999 and taken on police remand for 10 days, made disclosure statement vide memo dated 18.2.1999, Ext. 43 on the basis of which red bullet motorcycle used in the crime was also recovered on the same day i.e. 18.2.1999 vide pointing out cum recovery and seizure memo dated 18.2.1999, Ext. 40. In the light of the disclosure statement made by Rajan Tiwary before the C.B.I. on 17.2.1999 I.O. of C.B.I. filed petition dated 22.2.1999 Ext. 41 before the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi so as to enable Rajan Tiwary to record his statement under Section 164 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 97 Cr.P.C. Perusal of petition dated 22.2.1999 Ext. 41 indicates that C.B.I. arrested accused Rajan Tiwary who played main role in the crime and unearthed the actual criminal conspiracy attributing the role of other accused persons. Statement of Rajan Tiwary was recorded by the C.B.I. whereunder he supported the case of C.B.I. and made statement against other accused divulging their conspiracy and involvement of other important suspect who are having good social status in the society. In the light of the request made in petition dated 22.2.1999, C.M.M., Delhi made over the petition to Sri Gurdeep Singh Saini, Metropolitan Magistrate under his endorsement dated 22.2.1999 itself, Ext. 36. Having received petition dated 22.2.1999 Sri Gurdeep Singh Saini Metropolitan Magistrate considered the petition and directed that the accused Rajan Tiwary be again produced before him on the same day at 12.30 P.M. In the light of the aforesaid order of the Metropolitan Magistrate Rajan Tiwary was again produced before Sri Gurdeep Singh Saini Metropolitan Magistrate at 12.30 P.M. when learned Magistrate made further endorsement on the petition, which is marked as Ext. 36/1 and proceeded to record following order :-

22.02.99 ―An application for recording of statement of 12.30 accused Rajan Tiwari s/o Vishwa Jeevan Ram Tiwari PM was moved before Ld. CMM and the same was assigned to me. The accused Rajan Tiwari was produced in muffled face before me. I have sent all the police Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 98 persons out of the Court and the accused is made to sit in my chamber. I have explained to the accused that he is not bound to make his statement. He is also told that if he makes the statement it can be used against him as evidence. He insisted on making the statement. I have given him time of one hour to think over it again.‖ Sd/-
MM 22.02.1999
88. In the light of the order passed by the Metropolitan Magistrate at 12.30 P.M. he again interacted with Rajan Tiwary at 1.15 P.M. and recorded the following order as also his satisfaction about the voluntary nature of the statement which Rajan Tiwary was proposing to make before him.
1.15 PM ― Present accused Rajan Tiwari in my chamber. I have again asked the accused that whether he wants to give confessional statement. He stated that he want to bring real culprit to book and I am making statement voluntarily. I have again warned him that he is not bound to make confessional statement and his statement can be used as evidence against him, but he persisted in making the statement. I have questioned him as follows.
Ques :- Why do you want to make confessional statement? Ans :- eSa viuk c;ku blfy, nsuk pkgrk gwa fd eSa vc lq/kjuk pkgrk gwa vkSj vlyh vknfe;ksa dks lkeus ykuk pkgrk gwaA Ques :- Whether you have been pressurized by Police or CBI to make statement?

 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013                    99




                  Ans :- eq>s fdlh us Hkh ncko ugha MkykA
                      eSa viuh ethZ ls c;ku nsuk pkgrk gwaA


                  RO & AC                                    Sd/-
                     Sd/-                                    MM Delhi.
                  Rajan Tiwari                               22.02.99


                          I am satisfied that the accused Rajan Tiwari is
making confessional statement voluntarily without any force from any quarter in order to make clean breast. Let his statement u/s 164 Cr.P.C. be recorded.

Disclosure of Sh. Rajan Tiwary s/o Sh. Vishwa Jeevan Tiwari age-26 years R/o village Saharsa, P.O. Saharsa, PS Gagha, Distt. Gorakhpur, UP.

Without oath.

89. The signature of Rajan Tiwary over the order sheet of the learned Metropolitan Magistrate and the last page of the confessional statement has been marked as Exts. 34 and 34/1. Confessional statement of Rajan Tiwary has been marked as Ext. 35. Perusal of confessional statement of Rajan Tiwary Ext. 35 indicates that the same has been recorded in four pages but Rajan Tiwary put his signature only on the 4th page, which has been marked as Ext. 34/1.

90. Rajan Tiwary was put on T.I. Parade on 1.5.1999 in Beur Jail, Patna and was identified by K.C. Sarkar, P.W. 8 but before proceedings could be completed disturbance was created and the Magistrate submitted report dated 3.5.1999, Ext. 7. Another T.I. Parade Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 100 was arranged on 12.5.1999 when Rajan Tiwary was identified by P.Ws. 9 and 10 vide T.I. Chart, Ext. 6. C.B.I. having completed investigation in RC 12(S)/98 submitted charge sheet no.01 dated 10.5.1999 indicating Rajan Tiwary and Anil Kumar Yadav as the accused in judicial custody and sent up for trial. The other three i.e. Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav, Harish Chaudhary and Amar Yadav were shown as absconder. Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav was arrested on 23.5.1999 and supplementary charge sheet no.04 dated 19.8.1999 was submitted naming Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav in column no.1 of the supplementary charge sheet, Harish Chaudhary and Amar Yadav were again shown as absconder.

91. After issue of notification of the Government of India dated 28.9.1998 and registration of RC12(S)/98/SIC-IV/New Delhi by the C.B.I. on 12.10.1998 but before submission of charge sheet dated 10.5.1999, supplementary charge sheet dated 19.8.1999 appellant Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav filed Cr. Writ Petition No.258 of 1999 before Delhi High Court on 26.3.1999 praying inter alia to quash the notification of the Government of India dated 28.9.1998 entrusting investigation of Case No.230/98 P.S. K. Hat, Purnia to C.B.I. including investigation conducted by C.B.I. after registration of RC 12(S)/98/SIC- IV/New Delhi on the ground that after submission of charge sheet in F.I.R. No.230/98, P.S. K. Hat, Purnia, Bihar cognizance of the offence Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 101 found true during investigation by the Purnia police having already been taken by the competent court i.e. C.J.M., Purnia, C.B.I. had no jurisdiction to investigate de novo. It is submitted by the counsel for the C.B.I. that from perusal of writ petition, paragraph 4 and the counter affidavit filed on behalf of the respondents it would appear that appellant Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav was aware of the disclosure statement, confession recorded under Section 164 Cr.P.C. by Rajan Tiwary and Anil Yadav.

92. In response to the prayer made in the writ petition C.B.I. filed counter affidavit stating that the appellant Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav is a dreaded criminal who is also involved in the murder of Kalyan Chandra Sarkar. His involvement in the said murder has come to light during investigation of the said case by the C.B.I. pursuant to the notification of the Government of India dated 28.9.1998 and registration of RC 12(S)/98/SIC-IV New Delhi on 12.10.1998. In the light of the material collected during investigation non-bailable warrant has been issued for his arrest on 6.3.1999 but he is absconding and evading arrest. Delhi High Court having considered the contents of writ petition, counter affidavit and having noticed the suppression made by appellant Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav dismissed the writ petition imposing cost of Rs. 25,000/- under order dated 5.5.1999. Perusal of the said order would indicate that while dismissing the writ petition Delhi High Court Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 102 held that the writ petition was filed by Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav to thwart further investigation by the C.B.I. in the murder of Ajit Sarkar. Delhi High Court in the said order also noticed the suppression made by Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav that he had earlier filed an application for anticipatory bail which was subsequently withdrawn by him but such information was withheld from the Delhi High Court. Having noticed the said suppression, Delhi High Court directed its Registrar General to file a complain before an appropriate Court against the appellant for making false statement in Paragraph-10 of the petition that there was no question of his absconding from prosecution when it is clear that on the date of the petition i.e. 26.3.1999 appellant Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav was already an absconder evading arrest in response to warrant issued by the Special Magistrate, C.B.I., Patna on 6.3.1999.

93. Counsel for the C.B.I. next submitted that appellant Rajan Tiwari also challenged charge-sheet submitted by the C.B.I in R.C 12 (S)/98/ SIC-IV New Delhi dated 10.5.1999 before this Court by filing Cr. Misc. No. 24843/2000 on 30.8.2000 on the ground that though the provisions of Section 173(8) of Cr.P.C. provides for further investigation but that does not mean a fresh investigation which appears to have been done by the C.B.I. in the present case as in its investigation C.B.I. has propounded a new theory about the murder which is not at all in conformity with the findings of the local Purnea Police which submitted Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 103 charge-sheet dated 19.9.1998 and cognizance of the offence was also taken by the C.J.M., Purnea under order dated 23.9.1998. Aforesaid submission was repelled by the Court in Paragraph 6 of its order dated 20.3.2002, reported in 2002(4) PLJR 327 with reference to the notification of the State Government dated 11.8.1998, Ext. 8 in terms whereof State Government recommended to the Government of India under Section 6 of Delhi Police Establishment Act to entrust the investigation of K. Hat P.S. Case No. 230/98 dated 14.6.1998 to the C.B.I. and held that as the State Government had the power to take away the investigation from the local police and to entrust it to the C.B.I. which entrustment was made before the State Police submitted charge- sheet, submission of charge-sheet by the C.B.I. was not a case of further investigation into a case and the C.B.I. was authorized to investigate the case in the manner as it deemed fit and to reach its own conclusion. This Court in the bottom of Paragraph 6 clearly held that grant of consent by the State Government would tantamount to taking over the investigation from the State police and to transfer it to the C.B.I. Having held as above, the petition questioning the submission of charge-sheet by the C.B.I. was dismissed.

94. Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav filed Cr. Misc. No.27412 of 2000 before the Patna High Court on 19.9.2000 seeking transfer of case records of K. Hat P.S. Case No.230/98 from C.J.M., Purnea to the Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 104 court of Additional Sessions Judge-XI cum C.B.I. Court, Patna so as to enable the Additional Sessions Judge-XI cum C.B.I. Court, Patna to try both the sets of accused persons sent up for trial by the Purnea police under charge sheet dated 20/21.09.1998 and by the C.B.I. under charge sheet/ supplementary charge sheet dated 10.5.1999/ 19.8.1999 filed in RC No. 12(S)/98 but the application was dismissed under order dated 19.04.2001.

95. Supreme Court under order dated 25.7.2001 reported in (2004) 7 SCC 539 set aside the order dated 6.9.2000 granting bail to appellant Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav.

96. On 9.4.2003 Madhusudan Rishi, P.W. 9 expressed his apprehension with regard to threat to his life before the trial court and the trial court under order dated 9.4.2003 appreciating the gravity of the threat directed S.P., Purnea to make necessary arrangement.

97. Supreme Court under order dated 12.3.2004 reported in (2004) 7 SCC 528 set aside the order granting bail to Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav. Perusal of said order indicates that Supreme Court took note of the fact that large number of witnesses examined after release of the appellant on bail turned hostile and there were complaints made to the court about the threat administered by the said accused or his conspirators to witnesses in the case.

98. In the light of the complaint dated 9.3.2004 made by R.N. Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 105 Singh, P.W. 7 the trial court under order dated 7.5.2004 directed Director General of Police, Bihar and S.P., Purnea to make necessary arrangement for the security of P.W. 7.

99. Supreme Court under order dated 20.7.2004 reported in (2005) 3 SCC 307 directed that Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav be kept in prison cell like any other prisoner and should not be kept in hospital on his request which was not genuine. Furthermore contempt notice was issued to Medical Superintendent, Medical College and Hospital, Patna for furnishing false information to court. Supreme Court also observed that Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav had surreptitiously managed to obtain his production warrant from Fast Track Court in connivance with the Peskar and used this opportunity to address election meeting at his constituency in Madhepura. The Court took suo motu cognizance of newspaper report under order dated 3.2.2005 reported in (2005) 3 SCC 310, 311.

100. Supreme Court under order dated 18.1.2005 reported in (2005) 2 SCC 42 cancelled the bail granted by the High Court to Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav observing that the approach of the High Court was irresponsible, contrary to record and tantamounts to overruling the finding of the Supreme Court by substituting its own subjective satisfaction.

101. Supreme Court under order dated 14.2.2005 reported in Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 106 (2005) 3 SCC 284 transferred Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav from Beur Jail, Patna to Tihar Jail, Delhi for causing and being involved in serious blatant and unabashed violation of the Bihar Jail Manual and for utter disregard to the rule of law coupled with complete inability or unwillingness of the jail authorities to prevent such violation by him.

102. During the pendency of this appeal Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav was admitted to the privilege of bail by the High Court under order dated 18.2.2009 which was set aside under order dated 3.5.2010 reported in (2010) 6 SCC 417 with reference to the observations made by the Supreme Court in its earlier order reported in (2007) 1 SCC 70, paragraph 24 that in the facts and circumstances of the case Supreme Court found no merit in the appeal filed by Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav which was dismissed observing that no further application for bail will be considered on his behalf in this case by any court as already a large number of bail applications have been rejected earlier both by the High Court and the Supreme Court.

Further investigation/reinvestigation and Discharge of previous set of accused by the Special Judicial Magistrate

103. Learned counsel for the C.B.I. with reference to the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Central Bureau of Investigation Vs. Rajesh Gandhi, (1996) 11 SCC 253, paragraphs 8, Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 107 9 submitted that decision to investigate or the decision on the Agency which should investigate does not attract principles of natural justice. The accused cannot have a say in the matter of Agency which should investigate the offences he is charged with. There is no provision in law under which while granting consent or extending the powers and jurisdiction of the Delhi special Police Establishment to the specified State and to any specified case reasons are required to be recorded on the face of the notification. In this connection, he also referred to the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Vipul Shital Prasad Agarwal Vs. State of Gujarat and Another, (2013) 1 Supreme Court Cases 197, paragraphs 4, 13, 18 and the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of T.T. Antony Vs. State of Kerala and others, AIR 2001 Supreme Court 2637, paragraphs 9, 11, 15, 18, 27, 28, 35 and Union of India Vs. Prakash P. Hinduja and another, (2003) 6 SCC 195, paragraphs 10, 16, 17, 20, 21 and defended the decision of the State Government to grant consent for investigation of K.Hat P.S. Case No. 230/98 by the C.B.I. under notification dated 11.8.1998, Ext. 8 and the decision of the Government of India to entrust such investigation to the C.B.I. under notification dated 28.9.1998, Ext. 42.

104. Learned counsel for the C.B.I. further submitted that having registered RC 12(S)/98/SIC-IV/New Delhi on 12.10.1998 for administrative convenience it was the duty of the C.B.I. to further Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 108 investigate the offences committed in connection with incident in question i.e. murder of Ajit Sarkar and two others by examining the prosecution witnesses including others and to reach its own conclusion about the set of accused i.e. appellants and others involved in the crime and to file charge sheet dated 10.5.1999 and the supplementary charge sheet dated 19.8.1999. He further submitted that it was the Special Judicial Magistrate, C.B.I., Patna who passed order dated 15.9.1999 in consideration of the charge sheet dated 10.5.1999 and supplementary charge sheet dated 19.8.1999 submitted by the C.B.I. recommending these appellants and two others to face trial in connection with murder of Ajit Sarkar and while considering the said charge sheet C.B.I. Magistrate discharged the accused sent up for trial under charge sheet dated 20.9.1998 and only committed the case of the appellant charge-sheeted by the C.B.I. for trial. The failure of the Magistrate not to commit the case of the accused persons sent up for trial by the Purnea Police, the investigation of the offence made by the C.B.I. and the trial of the appellants cannot be questioned.

105. According to learned counsel for C.B.I. mere fact that during further investigation of the offence it emerged that persons other than the accused arrayed by Bihar Police were involved does not mean that reinvestigation was conducted by the CBI. It is respectfully submitted that the Investigation Agency has the right and sacrosanct Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 109 duty to investigate the matter independently and impartially and place all the relevant material for the consideration of the Court. It would be relevant to note that during course of further investigation by CBI, Kalyan Chandra Sarkar, Lal Bahadur Uraon stated before CBI that the Fard Bayan alleged to have been recorded by Bihar Police was merely signed by them without reading the contents thereof. Other than the alleged Fard Bayan recorded by Bihar Police, there existed no evidence against the set of persons stated to be the assailants in the said Fard Bayan. Rather it was the categoric and consistent assertion of the witnesses that the said persons were not involved and in fact certain other persons were the assailants. During the course of further investigation the version of the witnesses was found to be reliable as it found confirmation from the judicial confession of the unknown assailant who turned out to be Rajan Tiwari and the said confession was found to be truthful as it found corroboration in material particulars from various circumstances that are proved from cogent documentary evidence. Therefore, in light of these attending circumstances the CBI filed the first supplementary charge sheet in the case on 10.05.1999 against Rajan Tiwari and Anil Kumar Yadav. Other co accused persons namely Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav, Harish Chaudhary and Amar Yadav were arrested subsequently and therefore further supplementary charge sheets were filed. Reliance is placed on the observations of the Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 110 Hon'ble Supreme Court in TT Antony v. State of Kerala reported as (2001) 6 SCC 181 wherein illustration in Para 18 is pressed into service. It assumes significance that all the material collected by Bihar Police was duly placed in all fairness before the CBI court by the CBI and even the investigating officer of the Bihar Police was arrayed as prosecution witness as the CBI had conducted only further investigation in the matter and not reinvestigation in which case the material collected earlier may not have been produced before the court. It is respectfully submitted that the supplementary charge sheet was filed by the CBI before the Court of Learned Special Judicial Magistrate-CBI, Patna as only he is competent to receive charge sheets submitted by CBI to the exclusion of all other magistrates and he is notified with such powers by the State Government in consultation with the Hon'ble High Court. Reliance is placed upon the decision reported as (2008) 2 SCC 383 titled State of Andhra Pradesh v. A. .S Peter that is squarely applicable to the facts of the present case and buttresses the said proposition. Therefore it is evident that further proceedings in the said case could be carried out before the said Magistrate only and Chief Judicial Magistrate, Purnea stood divested from any powers in regard to the case upon transfer of investigation from the State Police to the CBI. In view of the above, it is humbly submitted that the Learned Chief Judicial Magistrate- Purnea was not competent to keep the matter Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 111 pending before him and should have on its own transferred the records to the Court of Learned Special Judicial Magistrate CBI, Patna.

106. The second limb of the submission of the appellants that even for conducting further investigation in terms of section 173(8) of Cr.P.C. formal permission of the Magistrate must necessarily be sought by the investigation agency in view of the recent judgment dated 13.12.2012 of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Vinay Tyagi v. Irshad Ali Criminal Appeal no. 2040-2041 of 2012 is of no avail as the Learned Chief Judicial Magistrate vide order dated 23.09.1998 permitted the Bihar Police to carry on further investigation with respect to the appellants herein and others. The CBI has stepped into the shoes of the state Police and therefore was entitled to carry on further investigation in the offence. There is no quarrel with the proposition lamented in the aforesaid judgment of the Supreme Court and in the facts of the present case formal permission had been sought from the Learned Magistrate before carrying on further investigation. Reliance is placed upon 3 judge bench decision of Apex Court in State of Bihar and another v. J.A.C. Saldanha and others reported as (1980) 1 SCC 554 wherein it was held that even Superior Officer has the untrammeled power to undertake the exercise of further investigation. Reliance is placed on the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Union of India v. Prakash P. Hinduja and another reported as (2003) Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 112 6 SCC 195 wherein it was held that even if there is an illegality in investigation the same does not vitiate the cognizance and trial subsequent thereto. Recently the Hon'ble Supreme Court in its judgment titled Vipul Shital Prasad Agarwal v. State of Gujarat and another reported as (2013) 1 SCC 197 has held in para22 that it is the administrative practice of the CBI to reproduce the FIR of the local police inform of RC and the same cannot be construed to mean that a fresh FIR has been registered by the CBI.

107. Learned counsel submitted that there was no evidence against accused Bipin Singh @ Bipin Chaudhary, Diwakar Chaudhary, Jawahar Yadav @ Nirmal Yadav, Abdul Sattar and Pappu Dev @ Sanjay Dev, a request was made by CBI for their discharge. The contention on behalf of the appellant before this Hon'ble Court that the learned Special Judicial Magistrate, CBI was not competent to discharge the said accused and discharge, if any, could have been made by the Additional Sessions Judge can have no force as all the grievances of the appellants against the factum of their being charge sheeted were agitated before the Higher Courts and the same were rejected. The order of the learned Special Judicial Magistrate dated 15.09.1999 discharging the previous accused was not assailed by the appellants as evidently no prejudice was felt by them. The factum of the said accused persons not being committed, therefore not charged and consequently not put to trial Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 113 cannot effect the trial of the appellants in any manner. Even assuming that there was some procedural irregularity or failure on part of the Learned Magistrate in discharging the accused, such alleged impropriety at the pre-trial stage would not vitiate the trial of the appellants as no prejudice has been demonstrated at their instance which resulted in failure of justice. It is a settled proposition that the object of criminal justice machinery is to punish the guilty if the evidence led at trial proves the culpability beyond reasonable doubt and the entire exercise cannot be rendered non-est on account of an alleged irregularity which admittedly has caused no prejudice to the accused much less, resulted in any failure of justice. Furthermore, if at any time evidence against the persons arrayed as accused by Bihar police emerged before the Learned Sessions Court recourse to the provision of section 319 Cr.P.C. could have been taken at any stage. Even otherwise in ultimate analysis the function of the Learned Trial Court and this Hon'ble Court exercising its appellate jurisdiction in terms of section 374 Cr.P.C. is required to assess the credibility of evidence qua the appellants herein and if the evidence inspires confidence the court may act upon it to tender a finding of guilt, as has been done in the instant case by the Learned Trial Court. The scope of the present appeal is confined to the conclusions arrived at by the Learned Trial Court based upon the evidence led before it against the accused persons who were charged i.e. the appellants- Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 114 herein. It has been consistently held by the Supreme Court that any defect, irregularity and absence of charge cannot ipso facto result in vitiating trial. Reliance is placed upon constitution bench decision in AIR 1956 SC 116- Willie (William) Slaney v. State of Madhya Pradesh. Significantly, the Hon'ble Supreme Court in decision reported as (2012) 2 SCC 188 titled Nupur Talwar v. CBI, Dehi has held that the Magistrate even in cases where final report is filed by the Investigating Agency, is competent under the code to refuse to take cognizance and is not bound by the opinion of the Investigating Officer.

108. Learned counsel for the C.B.I. next submitted that the challenge on behalf of the appellant Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav to the validity of Section 30 of the Evidence Act whereunder judicial confession recorded by an accused is not only admissible against him but also against co-accused without giving opportunity to the co-accused to cross-examine the accused recording confession implicating him has to be upheld in view of the safeguards provided under Sub-Sections (2), (3), (4) of Section 164 Cr.P.C. He further submitted that vires of even more draconian provision contained in Section 15 of the Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act, 1987 as amended by TADA (Amendment) Act, 1993 providing for confession made by a person before a police officer not lower in rank than a Superintendent of Police and recorded by such police officer either in writing or on any Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 115 mechanical device like cassettes, tapes or sound track shall be admissible in trial of such person or co-accused abettor or conspirator has already been upheld in the light of the statutory warning contained in Sub-Section (2) of Section 15 of TADA Act required to be given by the police officer to the person making the statement before recording his statement vide judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Kartar Singh Vs. State of Punjab, (1994) 3 SCC 569, paragraphs 192 to 197, 205, 210 to 212, 214 to 223, 255.

109. Learned counsel for the C.B.I. next submitted that in the instant case Sri G.S. Saini, P.W. 59 the then Metropolitan Magistrate granted sufficient time for reflection to Rajan Tiwary and on his insistence to record statement as he wanted to improve himself proceeded to record the statement of Rajan Tiwary after administering statutory warning in terms of Sub-Section (2) of Section 164 Cr.P.C. that the statement which he is proposing to record will be used against him in evidence, which is evident from endorsement made by Sri Saini over petition filed by I.O., P.W. 61 for recording the statement of Rajan Tiwary under Section 164 Cr.P.C. as also from the order sheet maintained by Sri Saini on that date and the certificate recorded by him, as is required under Sub-Section (4) of Section 164 beneath the statement.

110. Learned counsel for the C.B.I. further submitted that Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 116 submission made on behalf of the appellant Rajan Tiwary that he having not been allowed at least 24 hours time for reflection the confession recorded by him on 22.2.1999 is wholly involuntary and fit to be rejected in view of the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Kartar Singh(supra), paragraph 390 is misconceived as paragraph 390 is the minority opinion of K. Ramaswamy J. where his lordship observed with reference to the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Sarwan Singh(supra), paragraph 10 that sufficient time should be given to the accused for reflection, but no hard and fast rule could be laid as to the proper time for reflection.

111. Learned counsel for the C.B.I. further submitted that confession under Section 164 Cr.P.C. is to be recorded as per the manner provided in Section 281 Cr.P.C. Learned counsel distinguished the case of Sarwan Singh (supra) and submitted that confession recorded by Sarwan Singh was rejected as visible mark of injury was noticed by the Magistrate before recording the confession, yet he was not granted 24 hours time for reflection. In the case of Rajan Tiwary no visible mark having been seen on the person of Rajan Tiwary and Rajan Tiwary was insisting to record his confession so as to improve himself Metropolitan Magistrate, P.W. 59 allowed him 45 minutes time for reflection. Counsel for the C.B.I. relied upon the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Shankaria Vs. State of Rajasthan, 1978(4) SCC 453, paragraphs Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 117 9, 10, 16, 17, 18 to 23, 27 and submitted that on June 12, 1974 Shankaria under the orders of the Magistrate was lodged in judicial lock up. On June 13, 1974 application was filed to the Judicial Magistrate Ist Class requesting him to record the confessional statement of Shankaria. The Magistrate thereupon passed order that Shankaria be produced from judicial lock up on June 14, 1974 at 7 A.M. for the purpose. Shankaria was accordingly, produced before the Magistrate for recording his confession on June 14, 1974 at 7 A.M. The Magistrate put some questions to Shankaria by way of preliminary examination to ensure that he wanted to make statement voluntarily. The Magistrate gave Shankaria sometime for reflection and proceeded to record his confession from 8.45 A.M. onwards, yet the confession of Shankaria recorded by the Magistrate. He submitted that following the law laid down by the Supreme Court in the case of Shankaria (supra) this Court should also accept the confession recorded by Rajan Tiwary, Ext. 35.

112. Learned counsel for the C.B.I. also submitted that safeguard provided under Sub-Section (3) of Section 164 Cr.P.C. is not required to be read into Sub-Section (2) of Section 164 Cr.P.C. and submitted that as P.W. 59 had taken the precaution required under Sub- Section (2) of Section 164 Cr.P.C. before proceeding to record the confession, confession of Rajan Tiwary Ext. 35 is fit to be relied upon by this Court. Reliance in this connection was placed by the learned Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 118 counsel for the C.B.I. on the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Ravindra Kumar Pal (supra), paragraph 22.

113. Learned counsel for the C.B.I. with reference to the judgment of the Calcutta High Court in the case of Subodh Kumar Dhar Ray and others Vs. State on First Information Report of Rajendra Lal Das, 1966 Cri.L.J. 323, paragraphs 13, 16, 38 submitted that Calcutta High Court in the case of Subodh Kumar Dhar Ray (supra) distinguished the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Sarwan Singh (supra) as Sarwan Singh before recording his confessional statement was in police custody for more than 5 days but was just given half an hour time to reflect whether he would make a confession. Having distinguished the judgment in the case of Sarwan Singh (supra) Calcutta High Court accepted the confession made by the accused who was not granted 24 hours time to reflect as the accused remained in police custody for a short time before recording confession and there was no evidence to show that any threat, coercion or inducement was offered by the police to the accused persons before they made confession.

114. Learned counsel for the C.B.I. also relied on the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Sidhartha and others Vs. State of Bihar, (2005) 12 SCC 545, paragraphs 10, 14, 15, 16, 18, 19, 20 and submitted that the confession made by the accused under Section Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 119 164 Cr.P.C. is to be relied upon for corroborating the prosecution case.

115. Learned counsel for the C.B.I. reiterated the submissions made above by filing written submission and explaining the legal position with regard to judicial confession. It was foremost contended that reflection time of 24 hours was not provided to the accused and the confession was recorded merely after 45 minutes which is in teeth with the observation of Hon'ble Supreme Court in Sarwan Singh v. State of Punjab reported as AIR 1957 SC 637. The said observations in the case of Sarwan Singh (Supra) have been affirmed by a Single Judge (Hon'ble Mr. Justice Ramaswamy) in his dissenting view in the judgment of the Supreme Court in Kartar Singh v. State of Punjab reported as (1994) 3 SCC 569 in the context of recording confessions under TADA. Relevant would it be to note at the outset the said view of Justice Rama Swamy was not endorsed by the majority Judges. It is respectfully submitted that no inexorable proposition was laid down in the Sarwan Singh (Supra) judgment. In the very same judgment it was observed that it would naturally be difficult to lay down any hard and fast rule as to the time which should not be allowed to an accused person in any given case. In this context speaking generally, requirement of 24 hour reflection time to accused was laid down. Regard may also be had to the judgments of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Shankaria v. State of Rajasthan reported as (1978) 4 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 120 SCC 453 and Sidharth v. State of Bihar reported as (2005) 12 SCC 545 wherein while taking into consideration the judgment in Sarwan Singh (supra), the Apex Court acted upon the Judicial Confession which was recorded in less than 24 hours reflection time. Reliance is also placed on the observations of the Division Bench of the Calcutta High Court in the Judgment of Subodh Kumar Dhar Ray and Others v. State on first Information report of Rajendra Lal Das reported as 1966 Cri.L.J 323. The said cases unequivocally evince that the judicial confession may be held to be voluntary and safely acted upon by the court even if less than 24 hours reflection time is provided to the accused.

116. The learned Magistrate had the invaluable opportunity of observing the demeanour of the accused and he meticulously satisfied himself of the voluntariness of the accused in making the confession. He made the accused sit in his chamber, insulated from any potential duress or influence of the officials of the CBI. The Learned Magistrate put various questions to Rajan Tiwari and administered the statutory warnings contemplated under section 164 Cr.P.C. before undertaking the solemn act of recording the judicial confession. Furthermore, it would be pertinent to highlight at this stage that it is the consistent defence of Rajan Tiwari as evidenced from his retraction statement dated 30.03.1999, cross examination of Learned Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 121 Magistrate- Gurdeep Saini (PW 59) and the section 313 statement of Rajan Tiwari that the judicial confession has been fabricated by the Learned Magistrate in connivance with the CBI. It is not the case of the accused Rajan Tiwari that he did not have sufficient time to make a considered decision whether or not he must make an admission of guilt before the Magistrate and therefore the confession should be excluded from consideration as involuntary. In view of the categoric defence of the accused that the confession was fabricated by the Judicial Officer in connivance with CBI, the alleged paucity of time for reflection is of no consequence as evidently no prejudice is suffered by the accused by the alleged paucity of reflection time. Reliance is placed upon the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in its decision reported as (1999) 5 SCC 253 titled State V. Nalini .

117. It is respectfully submitted that due weight must be attached to the satisfaction of the Learned Magistrate and the integrity of the proceedings conducted by him. Section 114 (e) of The Indian Evidence Act 1872 enjoins a presumption that may be drawn by the court that all judicial and official acts are performed regularly. It is ex facie implausible that a Judicial Officer of a different State who has no axe to grind would oblige the CBI to foist a confession upon accused Rajan Tiwari. It is humbly submitted that a serious note must be taken of such flagrantly false assertions that are made at the instance of the Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 122 accused persons lightly with a view to escape the consequences of such judicial confession in law. Reliance is placed upon the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court reported as (2002) 5 SCC 234.

118. The appellants have laid challenge to the confession on the premise that the appellant Rajan Tiwari was not remanded to judicial custody after recording of confession and the right of the accused to be remanded to judicial custody in case he refuses to make confession was not informed to him by the Learned Magistrate recording the confession. Reliance was placed upon the decision of the Apex Court in Rabindra Kumar Pal @ Dara Singh v. Republic of India reported as AIR 2011 SC 1436. It is respectfully submitted that in the present case the Learned Magistrate after duly satisfying himself as to the voluntariness of the confession and upon the insistence of the accused recorded the confession. Since the accused voluntarily proceeded to make the confession, the question of remanding him to judicial custody did not arise in view of the express and unambiguous mandate of section 164(3) of Cr.P.C. No requirement is envisaged under section 164(3) to inform the accused at the outset that if he chooses not to make the confession he would be sent to judicial custody. The accused must beforehand only be warned in terms of section 164(2) that he is not bound to make a confession and that, if he does so, it may be used as evidence against him. It is therefore respectfully submitted that Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 123 no fault can be attributed to the approach adopted by the Learned Magistrate while recording the confession. It is respectfully submitted that the judgment of the Apex Court in- Dara Singh (supra) in para 29 lays down guidelines on the aspect of recording judicial confessions and it would be pertinent to note that the Hon'ble Judges in their wisdom have consciously not laid down any requirement therein that the accused must be explained beforehand that he would be remanded to judicial custody if he chooses not to make the confession and neither any requirement of obtaining signatures of the accused on each page of the confessional statement has been adumbrated. A careful analysis of the said judgment reveals that for host of reasons cumulatively the Hon'ble High Court had refused to act upon the judicial confession made by accused persons and the Hon'ble Supreme Court affirmed the view taken by the High Court in ultimate analysis rather than endorsing each reason individually and tendering a finding thereon. It would also be noteworthy that in the said case the fundamental requirement of administering the warning that the confession may be used in evidence against the accused was not even complied by the court which goes at the root of the matter and coupled with other circumstances the High Court discarded the confession.

119. It was further contended on behalf of the appellants that the confession of accused Rajan Tiwari was not noted by the Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 124 Learned Magistrate in question answer form but in a mere narrative which falls foul of the requirement of law. It is respectfully submitted that a conjoint reading of section 164 Cr.P.C. and section 281 of Cr.P.C. unequivocally evinces that questions are required to be reproduced in the record only if asked to the accused. The sublime philosophy being that answers tendered by the accused would be better appreciated in light of the question asked by the court. In the present case, record palpably reveals that series of questions were asked by the Learned Metropolitan Magistrate to Rajan Tiwari before recording the confession and in order to ascertain and satisfy himself if the confession was being made voluntarily. The said questions are duly recorded and the entire proceedings were penned down by the Learned Magistrate in his own handwriting. Merely because the accused Rajan Tiwari chose to clearly and unambiguously narrate vividly the entire factual conspectus, and no requirement was felt to ask any questions during the narration by the accused, no fault can be found with the approach adopted by the Learned Magistrate. Reliance is placed upon the judgments reported as (1887) ILR 14 Cal. 539-Fekoo Mahto v. the Empress and MANU/WB/0405/1977-Asoke Kumar Chakraborty v. State wherein it has been held that confessions recorded in narrated form do not become admissible and the accused must demonstrate prejudice.

120. It is respectfully submitted that even if the Hon'ble Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 125 court is of the view that for any reason the Learned Magistrate did not comply with any requirements envisaged under section 164 Cr.P.C. or section 281 Cr.P.C., the confession would not automatically be excluded from consideration in view of mandate of section 463 Cr.P.C. As highlighted earlier since the defence of the accused Rajan Tiwari is that of fabrication of confession by the judicial officer in connivance with the CBI, no prejudice/injury to the defence on the merits is caused by any instance of non-compliance alleged by the accused in the present case. It would be relevant to note that the Hon'ble Supreme Court in its judgment reported as (1999)5 SCC 253- Nalini's case (supra) has taken into account the mandate of section 463 Cr.P.C. to uphold the judicial confession recorded in the matter. Reliance is also placed upon the Nalini's case (Supra) to repel the contention advanced on behalf of appellant that signatures of Rajan Tiwari were not taken on 3 pages of the confession. In this regard it would be pertinent to reproduce the relevant paragraphs of the aforesaid judgment in Nalini's case (Supra) for the perusal of this Hon'ble Court which in no uncertain terms brings forth the legal position as aforementioned.

"402. It is unnecessary to refer to the provisions of Section 281 of the Code as it is not disputed that otherwise the confessions of the accused have been properly recorded. Contention in the case of Nalini (A-1) is that the mandatory provisions of Rule Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 126 15(3) have been violated as it is not signed by Nalini (A-1) whose signatures are required at the end of the confession. It was thus submitted that since the confession does not bear the signatures of Nalini (A-1) it could not be said to be a valid confession. It is important that the accused signs the confession at the end. In that way he comprehends that he has made confession. Confession of Nalini (A-1), it was submitted, has to be rejected in its entirety. Confession is said to be in 18 pages out of which only pp. 1 to 16 bear her signatures while pp. 17 and 18, which are crucial to the confession, do not bear her signatures...
.... The High Court said that this omission cannot be cured by examining the Magistrate under Section 463 of the Code. Section 463 of the Code is as under:
"463. Non-compliance with provisions of Section 164 or Section 281.-(1) If any court before which a confession or other statement of an accused person recorded, or purporting to be recorded under Section 164 or Section 281, is tendered, or has been received, in evidence finds that any of the provisions of either of such sections have not been complied with by the Magistrate recording the statement, it may, notwithstanding anything contained in Section 91 of the Indian Evidence Act, Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 127 1872 (1 of 1872), take evidence in regard to such non- compliance, and may, if satisfied that such non-compliance has not injured the accused in his defence on the merits and that he duly made the statement recorded, admit such statement. (2) The provisions of this section apply to Courts of Appeal, reference and revision."...
404.....There could certainly be a human error but that would not mean that Section 463 of the Code becomes inapplicable. Mr Natarajan is correct in his submission that when the requirement of law is that confession should be signed by the person making it, it would mean his signatures at the end of the confession. What Section 463 requires is that evidence could be led of police officer recording the confession as to why provisions of Rule 15(3) could not be complied with while recording the confession. It has not been suggested or brought on record as to how not getting signatures of Nalini (A-1) on the last pages of the confession has injured her in her defence on the merits of the case. The confession has been corroborated in material particulars by means of an independent evidence even if the confessions of the co-accused are set apart. Confession of Nalini (A-1) was recorded on 7-8- 1991 and was sent to the Court of the Chief Judicial Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 128 Magistrate on the following day and on 9-8-1991 it was sent to the Designated Court. We find that the confession was duly made, which was recorded by V. Thiagarajan (PW 52). We are, therefore, inclined to admit the confession of Nalini (A-1) overruling the objection that Rule 15(3) of the TADA Rules has been violated." (emphasis supplied by learned counsel for the CBI)

121. It is respectfully submitted that even otherwise on first principle the contention of the appellants is misplaced as there is no requirement under section 164 Cr.P.C. to get signatures of the accused on each page of the statement. In the present case the Learned Magistrate took the signatures of the accused after recording his satisfaction as to the voluntariness of the confession that was arrived at after preliminary questioning of the accused and at the foot of the confession. In this light it would also be instructive to place reliance upon the Delhi High Court Rules which deal with recording confessional statement of accused persons. Perusal of the same also indicates that signature of accused on each page is not required.

5. Form prescribed for recording confessions- the annexed form for recording confessions taken under Section 164 has been prescribed and should invariably be used.

xxxxxxxxxxxxx Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 129 Record of a Confession made by an Accused Person (Section 164 of the Code of Criminal Procedure) ..............................Division In the Court of ..........................................

The State Versus The confession..................of...............taken by me.

............a *Magistrate of the ..

.............District, this ..........day of .......19.......... Memorandum of Enquiry (The Magistrate shall first, as required by Section 164(3), Code of Criminal Procedure, explain to the accused person that he is not bound to make a confession, and that if he does so, it may be used as evidence against him and shall then put and record answers to the following questions. If the answers are of such a character as to require him to do so, he should put such further questions as may be necessary to enable him to judge whether the accused person is acting voluntarily. In arriving at his conclusion on this point the Magistrate should consider inter alia the period during which the accused person has been in Police custody and make sure that the confession is not the result of any undue influence of ill treatment. Special care should be taken when women or children are produced by the Police for their confessions Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 130 being recorded).

Q.- Do you understand that you are not bound to make a confession?

A-

Q.- Do you understand that your statement is being recorded by a Magistrate, and that if you make a confession, it may be used as evidence against you?

A-

Q.- Understanding these two facts, are you making a statement before me voluntarily?

A-

Statement of accused (Make of signature of accused).

*Magistrate.

I have explained to ............ that he is not bound to make a confession, and that if he does so, any confession he may make may be used as evidence against him and I believe that this confession was voluntarily made. It was taken in my presence and hearing, and was read over to the person making it, and admitted by him to be correct, and it contains a full and true account of the statement made by him.

*Magistrate.

Dated.........

Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 131 xxxxxxxxxx The contention advanced on behalf of the appellant that the judicial confession was produced by the CBI before the court and therefore the possibility of tampering cannot be ruled out, especially in absence of signatures of accused on each page, is liable to be rejected as the Learned Magistrate has recorded the confession in his own handwriting and has supported the document in witness-box. If the CBI would have tampered the confession, the Learned Magistrate would have highlighted the same in his deposition and not proved the document.

122. It is submitted on behalf of the appellants that no judicial record/order with regard to police custody of accused Rajan Tiwari being entrusted to the CBI is available on the record and therefore the custody of CBI was illegal and the judicial confession recorded during the said period of custody is liable to be excluded. It is respectfully submitted that appellant Rajan Tiwari himself annexed in Criminal Miscellaneous No. 10646/2003 before the Hon'ble Patna High Court, photocopy of the remand petition dated 13.02.1999 and photocopy of order passed thereon by the Learned Duty Metropolitan Magistrate-New Delhi. He also filed the aforesaid remand petition in Criminal Miscellaneous No. 27008/2000 before Patna High Court. Furthermore, Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav himself annexed the true Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 132 copy of the remand petition as ANNEXURE P3 before Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in SLP (Crl.) No. 4018/1999. Therefore, it is evident that the said order was into existence and available on Judicial record. The appellants have raised this mischievous submission wittingly concealing from this Hon'ble Court the material fact that they themselves had annexed the said judicial orders as well as the application moved by CBI on 13.02.1999 in support of their petition and are attempting to play fraud upon the court. It is respectfully submitted that even if the original record of the said orders is not traceable, the same cannot be construed to mean that the order of remand of Rajan Tiwari in favour of CBI never existed. This Hon'ble Court is entitled to draw the necessary inference in terms of Section 114 Indian Evidence Act as to who would be the beneficiary in case of disappearance of the said judicial record and therefore who would have orchestrated the disappearance of the same. Furthermore, if the appellant Rajan Tiwari would have been in illegal custody of CBI a habeas corpus would have been filed or any complaint in this regard would have been contemporaneously lodged. In fact, even on 23-02- 1999 father of appellant Rajan Tiwari who was a lawyer himself moved a mischievous application which was withdrawn that his son Manish Tiwari was arrested and that he was not Rajan Tiwari as claimed by CBI. However, it was never contended that police custody was not Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 133 taken in furtherance of a valid remand order by the CBI. Significantly, the applicant raised objection to further/extension of remand to Police Custody and has expressly acknowledged in para 3 therein that the Police Remand was taken from the Duty Magistrate on holiday. Reliance is placed upon the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in its judgment reported as (2011) 10 SCC 445-Pragyna Singh Thakur v. State of Maharashtra wherein it was held that when the objection of illegality of custody was not taken at the earliest opportunity, the same would not be believed.

123. Learned counsel for the C.B.I. next submitted that retraction made by Rajan Tiwary under first undated application forwarded to the C.M.M., Delhi by Deputy Superintendent, Central Jail No. 5, Tihar, New Delhi under letter no.181 dated 1.3.1999, subsequent retraction made on 30.3.1999 and the third retraction petition dated 21.4.1999 is required to be rejected as this court is required to look for the reasons for making of the confession as well as for its retraction and after weighing the two to determine whether the retraction affects the voluntary nature of the confession. In the instant case, Rajan Tiwary having not furnished reasons for retraction his confession earlier made is reliable; the retraction made by him is fit to be rejected. Privy Council once observed, in India it is a rule to record the confession and to find it retracted later. Reliance in this connection was placed on the judgment Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 134 of the Supreme Court in the case of Bharat Vs. State of U.P., (1971) 3 SCC 950, paragraph 7 and State of T.N. Vs. Kutti alias Lakshmi Narasimhan, (2001) 6 SCC 550, paragraph 13.

124. Learned counsel for the C.B.I. placing reliance on the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Devender Pal Singh Vs. State of NCT of Delhi and Another, (2002) 5 SCC 234, paragraph 37 submitted that Rajan Tiwary recorded his confessional statement after P.W. 59 was satisfied that Rajan Tiwary wanted to record his confessional statement on his own without there being any pressure from the C.B.I. or any other quarter and it was his voluntary desire to make confessional statement as he wanted to improve himself. There is statutory presumption under Section 114(e) of the Evidence Act that when an official act is proved to have been done it will be presumed to have been regularly done and that being the legal position the retraction made without giving any cogent reason is required to be rejected. In this connection, learned counsel for the C.B.I. also referred to the answers given by Rajan Tiwary to question nos. 6, 7, 8 posed to him during his examination under Section 313 Cr.P.C. and submitted that Rajan Tiwary having not himself referred to the retraction while giving answer to question nos. 7, 8, the same cannot be relied upon. In this connection, he also pointed out that Rajan Tiwary got recorded his confession on 22.2.1999 when he did not make any complaint about torture in the Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 135 C.B.I. custody. He also did not make such complaint on 23.2.1999 when he was produced by the C.B.I. for being remanded to judicial custody and then again on 9.3.1999 when he came from judicial custody and again remanded in the same custody, as such, retraction on the ground of torture in police custody under first undated application which was forwarded to the C.M.M., Delhi under letter no.181 dated 1.3.1999 is fit to be rejected.

125. With reference to the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Pragyna Singh Thakur, (2011) 10 SCC 445, paragraphs 25, 27 learned counsel for the C.B.I. submitted that complain about the police torture is required to be made by the accused before the Magistrate at the first instance and not belatedly. He further submitted with reference to the first undated retraction application of Rajan Tiwary that from close perusal of said retraction application it would appear that Rajan Tiwary was apprehending his remand in Kabi Nagar(Gaziabad) P.S. Case No.626/98 registered for the offence under Section 302 I.P.C. and to ensure that he is not remanded in the said case and subjected to police torture and encounter he filed undated retraction application which does not affect the merit and genuineness of the confession made by him before P.W. 59 on 22.2.1999.

Belated retraction of judicial confession.

126. Submission made in paragraphs 78 to 80 was further Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 136 reiterated by filing written submission stating that the judicial confession made by accused accused Rajan Tiwari was retracted belatedly after a period of more than one month from Beur jail in Bihar. The confession was recorded before the Learned Magistrate on 22-02- 1999. Thereafter, accused Rajan Tiwari was produced before the Learned Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, New Delhi on 23-02-1999 when he was remanded to judicial custody. On 09-03-1999 the accused Rajan Tiwari was produced from judicial custody before the Court of Learned Chief Metropolitan Magistrate- R.K. Gauba with his advocate- Shri S.A. Hashmi, yet no retraction was made. It was only on 30-03- 1999 that accused Rajan Tiwari made retraction by means of a letter sent from jail. It is respectfully submitted that as highlighted in the preceding section that the version of the accused Rajan Tiwari that the judicial officer connived with CBI to fabricate the confession is ex facie unworthy of credit. The retraction which is belated in time and the inherently implausible version contained therein is not worth the piece of paper on which it is scribed, is not only liable to be ignored but is also a tell-tale mark of voluntariness of the confession which was later sought to be retracted, perhaps under the pressure of the co-accused Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav; who demonstrably exercised lot of influence even inside jail in Bihar as is evident from various orders of the Hon'ble Supreme Court leading to his transfer to Tihar Jail- New Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 137 Delhi. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in its judgment reported as (1971) 3 SCC 950 and (2001) 6 SCC 550 has extensively laid down the law with regard to retraction. With regard to the reliance placed by the Learned Counsel for the Appellant Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav upon the letter dated 01-03-1999 sent by accused Rajan Tiwari as his earliest statement of retraction, suffice would it be to state that bare perusal of the said letter unequivocally evinces that allegations comprised therein are confined to alleged torture by Delhi Police to extract disclosure in case F.I.R. No. 122/99 P.S R.K. Puram alleging torture by Delhi Police and not against officials of C.B.I to procure any confession under section 164 before Judicial Magistrate with regard to Ajit Sarkar case murder case. Therefore it assumes significance that appellant Rajan Tiwari in his retraction statement dated 30-03-1999 did not make any cross-reference to any previous retraction on 01-03-1999 as the same was obviously not in relation to Ajit Sarkar murder case. It would also be pertinent to note that the memorandum of appeal filed on behalf of Appellant Rajan Tiwari also does not refer to any retraction dated 01-03-1999 which also fortifies the contention advanced on behalf of C.B.I that the first retraction was made on 30-03-1999 with regard to Ajit Sarkar murder case and the retraction dated 01-03-1999 was with regard to disclosure statement to the Delhi Police in case F.IR No. 122/99 P.S. R.K. Puram.

Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 138 Availability of corroboration to the judicial confession in material aspects leading to assurance of its truthfulness.

127. Counsel for the C.B.I. also relied on the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Lokeman Shah Vs. State of West Bengal, (2001) 5 SCC 235, paragraph 13 to impress upon this Court the degree of corroboration which is required to prove the material particulars of confessional statement and submitted that the ocular evidence of P.Ws. 8, 9, 10 and the call details, Ext. 3 series together with photograph, material Ext. VII is quite sufficient to prove not only the association of Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav with Rajan Tiwary but also hatching of conspiracy by Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav and co- accused but also its execution by them.

128. Learned counsel submitted that in the preceding paragraphs of the written submissions it has been demonstrated that the judicial confession of appellant Rajan Tiwari was voluntary in nature. The other vital pre-requisite before acting upon a judicial confession is that of his truthfulness and the same can be adjudged in the present case by the ample corroboration available on record in form of eyewitness account of PW 8, PW 9 and PW 10(whose version is also corroborated by testimony of PW - 15 & PW- 16), scientific evidence of ballistic experts (PW-28 & P.W.-33) to the effect that AK-47 was used in the commission of offence, pointing out of various relevant spots by Rajan Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 139 Tiwari, call detail records, recovery of photograph (material Exhibit 7) of appellant Rajan Tiwari from the house of appellant Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav, motive of appellant Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav to do away with Ajit Sarkar as evinced from his proclamations at public gathering and recovery of the two motor cycles used in commission of offence. It is respectfully submitted that the Hon'ble Supreme Court has since time immemorial consistently held that corroboration is only a mere rule of prudence which has not crystallized into rule of law of universal acceptance, therefore, the court may act upon the judicial confession even without corroboration, if the same is found to be voluntary and truthful. However, when the said confession is retracted, which inevitably happens in every criminal case, the court may seek some corroboration only as a matter of caution before acting upon it against the maker. The Hon'ble Supreme Court has pertinently lodged a caveat that the corroboration need not be on every aspect but corroboration on material aspects would suffice. In the present case, as highlighted above there is ample corroboration available on record and therefore the court can safely act upon it. It has been contended on behalf of the appellants that the weapons used in the commission of offence were not recovered by the investigation agency and the same seriously impinges the credibility of the case projected by the prosecution. In this regard it would be profitable to press into service the Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 140 observations of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in its decision reported as Umar Mohammad Vs. State of Rajasthan, (2007) 14 SCC 711 wherein it has been held that where direct evidence in form of testimony of eye witnesses is believable non-recovery of weapons used in commission of offence would pale into insignificance.

129. It has also been contended on behalf of the appellants that the motor cycles used in commission of offence though claimed to have been recovered by CBI have not been produced before the Learned Trial Court and therefore, the said circumstance cannot be proved in accordance with law. It is respectfully submitted that the seizure memos of the recovery of the said motor cycles has been duly proved by the Investigating Officer and relevant witnesses have proved the factum of its recovery in their depositions. Even the accused persons put the circumstance of recovery of motor cycles in their examination under section 313 Cr.P.C. and therefore, it is not the case that the accused persons were not aware of the factum of such recovery. With regard to the contention that it was not produced before the Learned Trial Court, it would be beneficial to recount the observations of the Hon'ble High Court of Punjab & Haryana in its judgment titled Balraj Singh v. State of Punjab reported as 1982 Cri.L.J. 1374. It was observed that-

"...Whether the non-production of a part or the whole of the Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 141 case property in a criminal trial, would by itself, vitiate the conviction of the accused thereafter is the somewhat meaningful issue which has necessitated this reference to the Division Bench....
....When the aforesaid section 451 of the code itself positively visualizes and sanctifies the non-production of case property in the trial can it then reason-ably be said that a mere inadvertence or omission in producing the same and not exhibiting it in court would per se be fatal to the prosecution case. I do not think so. No principle could be cited before us which would show that the mere exhibition of the case property was so pivotal a thing that the failure to do so would take the very bottom out of a criminal prosecution.... But in the ultimate analysis the issue is one of the prejudice caused to the accused and any failure of justice resulting there from. In this context the question whether such an objection could be, but has not been raised at the earliest stage of trial is of considerable relevance. In a case of innocent or inadvertent non-production of the case property material prejudice is to be shown by the accused in order to claim the vitiation of the conviction. No abstract or absolute rule that "no case property, no conviction," can possibly be Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 142 raised to the pedestal of a rule of law, because this by itself is likely to occasion a failure of justice. As has been said earlier the substantial issues in a criminal trial like the proof and punishment of crime should not be converted into a plaything of technicalities. If the prosecution has innocently or inadvertently failed to exhibit the case property, yet the accused even though fully represented by counsel makes no objection or grievance thereof at the time of the trial, it would hardly lie in his mouth at the revisional stage to say that all the proceedings stand vitiated even though connived at or wholly condoned by his own conduct."
It is respectfully submitted that as per instructions dated 18.02.1999, the said motorcycles are still presently lying at P.S. K Hat, Purnea in running condition. The position of law with regard to use of a confession of a co-accused against another accused is materially different and is governed by section 30 of the Indian Evidence Act. It has been held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court that the court must not start with the confession of co-accused and rather the correct approach would be to marshal other evidence independent of the confession and if the court is not prepare to act upon it for any reason then the confession of the co-accused may be taken into account as a circumstance/material (not as evidence in the technical sense) in light Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 143 of which the other evidence can be appreciated and after taking such confession of co-accused into account, the court may feel impelled to act upon the other evidence and render a finding of guilt.

The above principles of law with regard to use of a confession against its maker and its limited use against the co-accused can be gathered from a conjoint reading of the following judgments of the Apex Court- (2001) 5 SCC 235 & (2003) 10 SCC 586.

Challenge to constitutional validity of section 30 Indian Evidence Act, 1872.

130. During the course of hearing, it has been contended by counsel on behalf of appellant-Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav, that section 30 of the Indian Evidence Act is unconstitutional and is liable to be read down. The Learned Counsel placed reliance on the observations of the 69th report of the Law Commission of India on the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 at page 225 under the chairmanship of Hon'ble Mr. Justice P.B. Gajendra Gadkar wherein it was recommended that present section 30 of the Indian Evidence Act should be repealed.

At the outset it is respectfully submitted that challenge to the vires of a statue must be made by preferring appropriate proceeding i.e. writ petition under Article 226 of Constitution of India and not in a criminal appeal wherein this Hon'ble Court exercises power in terms of section 374 of Cr.P.C. It would also be relevant to note that no such Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 144 ground has been taken in the memorandum of appeal and leave of the court was not taken to amend the said memorandum of appeal for raising additional grounds.

With regard to the merits of the submission, it is respectfully submitted that the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Kartar Singh's Case (Supra) upheld the constitutional validity of Section 15 of TADA which makes confession of co-accused recorded before a police officer not lower in rank of Superintendent of Police, admissible against the accused. It would also be relevant to highlight that in Paragraphs 210, 211 and 215 of the said judgment the Hon'ble Supreme Court held the existing statutory provisions of Cr.P.C. and the Indian Evidence Act, including section 30 thereof, to be in consonance with spirit of the Constitution. It is humbly submitted that there is a strong presumption of constitutionality of a statue and the burden is cast upon the party who makes the challenge. It is a trite proposition of law that ordinarily the Courts would attach due weight to the collective wisdom of the legislature which is manifested in form of the statue. Reliance is placed upon the recent judgment of the Apex Court in State of M.P. v. Rakesh Kohli reported as (2012) 6 SCC 312.

It is submitted with deepest respect that the observations of the Law Commission of India are only recommendatory in nature and exclusively premised upon the same the constitutional validity of a Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 145 provision cannot be successfully assailed, especially when the Constitution Bench in Kartar Singh case (supra) has found the said provision to be in consonance with the spirit of the Constitution. The Legislature has till recent years introduced vast amendments in the framework of Criminal Law but has evidently chosen not to accept the said recommendation of the 69th Report of the Law Commission in its collective wisdom.

In view of the above it is clear that the contention challenging the vires of the section 30 of the Indian Evidence Act or alternatively reading it down is liable to be rejected.

131. Learned counsel for the C.B.I. next referred to the photograph, material Ext. VII and submitted that the photograph is also a link to corroborate the confession made by Rajan Tiwary as from the photograph it is quite evident that after executing conspiracy hatched by Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav Rajan Tiwary came to Delhi and resided in the flat of Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav and then moved along with Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav, his wife and child to Vaishno Devi, Srinagar and other places, which is quite evident from the photograph as therein he has been seen with Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav, his wife and child at a tourist hilly place. In this connection, learned counsel for the C.B.I. also referred to Section 313 Cr.P.C. examination of appellant Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav and submitted that from the answers Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 146 rendered by appellant Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav it would be quite evident that he is feigning ignorance of his association with Rajan Tiwary and the confession recorded by him, which would be evident from answers given by Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav to question nos. 6, 8, 10, 11 and 19.

132. Learned counsel submitted that reliance placed by the counsel for the appellant Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav over paragraph 1 of the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Machhandar(supra) is misconceived as in the said judgment of the Supreme Court the accused was not given opportunity to explain the contents of the confessional statement, which would be evident from paragraph 17 of the said judgment. In the instant case, appellant Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav was given opportunity to explain the materials appearing against him i.e. confessional statement (Ext. 35), call details Ext. 3 series and photograph material Ext. VII, which is evident from question nos. 6, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 19 put to him. Learned counsel stated that when Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav was put question no. 19 he was shown photograph, material Ext. VII but from the answer given by Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav to the said question, it would appear that he has not only evaded the question but has given false answer to question no.19. He further submitted that question nos. 16, 17 have been put to appellant Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav so as to give him Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 147 opportunity to explain the call details, Ext. 3 series. Reliance in this connection is placed over the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Joseph S/O Koobeli Poulo Vs. State of Kerala, (2000) 5 SCC 197, paragraphs 10, 12, 14.

133. Learned counsel for the C.B.I. further reinforced his submission by submitting that objection with regard to the defective recording of the statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C. is required to be taken at the trial stage itself and not in appeal. Appellant Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav having not raised the question of defective recording of statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C. at the trial stage he is required to indicate the prejudice caused to him while recording his statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C. To buttress the aforesaid submission learned counsel referred to the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Satyavir Singh Rathi, ACP and others Vs. State through Central Bureau of Investigation, (2011) 6 SCC 1, paragraphs 76, 77, 78 and submitted that counsel for the appellant having not pointed out any prejudice caused to the appellant Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav while recording his 313 Cr.P.C. statement, the submission that error was committed while recording 313 Cr.P.C. statement is required to be ignored.

Effect of not showing material objects/Exhibits to the accused while recording statement under section 313 Cr.P.C. Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 148

134. Learned counsel for C.B.I. reiterated his submission made in above paragraphs and contended on behalf of appellant- Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav that the photograph (Material Exhibit

7) alleged to have been recovered by the CBI from his premises on 17.02.99 was not shown to him during questioning under Section 313 Cr.P.C, which is required under law. To buttress the said submission reliance was placed upon the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Machander v. The State of Hyderabad reported as AIR 1955 SC

792. It is respectfully further submitted that there is no requirement in law that the object/case property must mandatorily be shown to the accused during questioning under Section 313 Cr.P.C. Bare perusal of the said provision unequivocally evinces that the Court is required to question the accused generally on the case with a view to enable the accused to explain circumstances appearing in evidence against him. As palpably evident there is no hard and fast rule envisaged under the provision that the attention of the accused must specifically be drawn by producing each case property before him during questioning. It would also be relevant to note that copy of all the material relied by the prosecution along with the final report in terms of Section 173 Cr.P.C. is served in advance to the accused person under Section 207 Cr.P.C before committal before Court of Sessions. Furthermore, each document/object is specifically produced before the Court in presence Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 149 of the accused at the time of deposition of the relevant witness for the purpose of being marked in evidence, as in the present case when the said photograph was exhibited in evidence by PW-61, Dy. S.P. N. S. Kharayat on 19.08.2006 in presence of accused Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav who was connected through video conferencing from Tihar Jail in Delhi. Therefore, it is clear that the appellant Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav was well aware of the subject matter of questioning i.e. the photograph of himself and his family with Rajan Tiwari and therefore, there is no prejudice which has occasioned. In this regard it would also be significant that the accused Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav was represented by a battery of competent lawyers and if the accused would not have been sure of the photograph referred by the Court while questioning him, objection to this effect would have been moved before the Learned Trial Court sooner or later. The said allegation has been coined for the first time before the appellate Court and in view of the authoritative pronouncement of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Satyavir Singh Rathi V. State through CBI reported in (2011) 6 SCC 1 as the said argument deserves to be rejected as such. Interestingly, the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Machander (supra) has nowhere laid down any requirement for producing material objects during questioning in terms of Section 313 Cr.P.C, rather it was a case of omission on part of the Court to Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 150 question the accused with regard to the judicial confession alleged to have been made by him. The Hon'ble Supreme Court affirmed the finding of the Hon'ble High Court that the said confession was required to be jettisoned from consideration as the accused was not questioned with regard to the same and the Hon'ble High Court was of the opinion that prejudice had occasioned to the accused. As highlighted earlier the present case is not a case of omission to question with regard to a circumstance appearing in evidence against the accused and therefore, the reliance on judgment in Machander's case (supra) is misconceived.

Absence of certificate under section 65 - B Indian Evidence Act, 1872 not fatal to prosecution.

135. Counsel for the C.B.I. next submitted that from the call details, Ext. 3 series it would appear that on 14.6.1998 at 9.58 A.M. Harish Chaudhary made Rajan Tiwary speak to Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav from telephone no. 23929 installed at the Purnea residence of Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav to his Delhi telephone no.3730767 subscribed in his name. It would further appear from the call details that two calls were made from Katihar P.C.O. No.34679 of 42, 32 seconds duration at 18 hours 16 minutes 48 seconds and 18 hours 18 minutes 16 seconds at Delhi residence of appellant Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav on telephone no.3730767 and 3736358 subscribed in the name of his Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 151 wife. From same telephone booth another call of 1 minute 26 second duration was made at 20 hours 8 minute 41 second on telephone no.0551322035 which is the telephone installed at Gorakhpur residence of appellant Rajan Tiwary. The call details have been obtained under the signature of Ramashray Rajak, Sub-Divisional Engineer, Telecom, P.W. 6 and is admissible in evidence in view of his deposition and the deposition of Om Prakash Ramnani, P.W. 52 the husband of telephone booth owner as no suggestion was put to these two witnesses touching the authenticity of the call records or the possible tampering with the entries. In this connection, he also referred to Sub-Section (2) of Section 63 and Sub-Clause-(4) of Section 65B of the Evidence Act and submitted with reference to the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of State (N.C.T. of Delhi) Vs. Navjot Sandhu, AIR 2005 Supreme Court 3820, paragraph 15 that print outs taken from the computers/servers by making process and certified by a responsible officer of the service providing company can be led into evidence. Call details will show that the appellant Rajan Tiwary was in touch with Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav before and after the occurrence which is a very significant piece of evidence to corroborate the judicial confession of Rajan Tiwary. Reliance in this connection is placed on the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Sidhartha Vashisht @ Manu Sharma Vs. State (NCT of Delhi), (2010) 6 SCC 1, paragraph Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 152 225, 226 and it is submitted that call details so that Rajan Tiwary was in touch with appellant Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav soon after the occurrence.

136. Learned counsel further reiterated the aforesaid submission in his written submissions by stating that prosecution has not produced certificate under Section 65-B Indian Evidence Act, 1872 in support of the call records which are electronically generated documents and therefore, they must be stamped as inadmissible and excluded from consideration. It was further submitted that officials (PW 6, PW 11 & PW 12) who proved the said documents before Court were not technical experts and this infirmity warranted exclusion of such evidence. The answer to the above contentions can be safely found in the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in State (NCT of Delhi) v. Navjot Sandhu reported in AIR 2005 SC 3820 in Paragraph 15 @ page 3880 wherein the Apex Court has held that mere non-production of certificate in terms of Section 65-B does not preclude other means of proving the electronic records such as examination of an official from the authority. Thus the Hon'ble Court went on to observe that there was no obligation upon the prosecution to call upon a technical expert for examination in the first instance and such an officer could be summoned if in facts and circumstances of the case it was felt necessary by the accused. It would be relevant to note that in the present case the appellants have not Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 153 disputed the factum of exchange of calls between the said telephone numbers and have not challenged the genuineness of the records. Rather, it is the case of Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav that he spoke to some persons other than Rajan Tiwari. Therefore, in light of the said premises the argument of non-examination of technical expert loses its sting and is liable to be rejected.

Credibility of eye witness account.

137. Learned counsel for the C.B.I. then relied on the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Akbar and another Vs. State, 2009 Cr.L.J. 4199, paragraph 49 and submitted the manner in which ocular evidence has to be considered and appreciated by the court in a murder case. While placing reliance on the evidence of Ranu Kumar Singh, P.W. 19 paragraph 2 learned counsel for the C.B.I. with reference to the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of State of U.P. Vs. Nahar Singh, 1998(3) SCC 561, paragraph 14 submitted that the witness himself came to the place of occurrence after the crowd had already collected, as such, it is possible that P.W. 19 could have seen K.C. Sarkar after 45 minutes of his arrival. From the evidence of P.W. 19 it does not appear that P.Ws. 8, 9 and 10 have not come to the place of occurrence soon after the occurrence.

138. Learned counsel for the C.B.I. further submitted that D.W. 21 Madhumita Devi being the wife of Raj Kumar Yadav who Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 154 accompanied Rajan Tiwary on the first occasion when he had gone to assassinate Ajit Sarkar as per confessional statement of Rajan Tiwary being wholly interested witness should not be relied upon by this Court.

139. Learned counsel for the C.B.I. also submitted that for the failure of P.Ws. 8, 9 and 10 to approach the local police within reasonable time of the occurrence adverse inference is required to be drawn against the appellants as to why the eye witness did not approach the police for supporting the case or recording their version. Reliance in this connection has been placed on the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Gosu Jayarami Reddy and another Vs. State of Andhra Pradesh, (2011) 11 SCC 766, paragraph 37.

140. The law with regard to appreciation of ocular evidence of eye witnesses has been eruditely concatenated by Division Bench of Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in the matter titled Akbar v. State reported in 2009 CriLJ 4199.

I While appreciating the evidence of a witness, the approach must be whether the evidence of the witness read as a whole appears to have a ring of truth. Once that impression is formed, it is undoubtedly necessary for the Court to scrutinize the evidence more particularly keeping in view the deficiencies, drawbacks and infirmities pointed out in the evidence as a whole and evaluate them to find out whether it is against the general Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 155 tenor of the evidence given by the witness and whether the earlier evaluation of the evidence is shaken as to render it unworthy of belief.

II If the Court before whom the witness gives evidence had the opportunity to form the opinion about the general tenor of evidence given by the witness, the appellate court which had not this benefit will have to attach due weight to the appreciation of evidence by the trial Court and unless there are reasons weighty and formidable it would not be proper to reject the evidence on the ground of minor variations or infirmities in the matter of trivial details.

III When eye-witness is examined at length it is quite possible for him to make some discrepancies. But courts should bear in mind that it is only when discrepancies in the evidence of a witness are so incompatible with the credibility of his version that the Court is justified in jettisoning his evidence. IV Minor discrepancies on trivial matters not touching the core of the case, hyper technical approach by taking sentences torn out of context here or there from the evidence, attaching importance to some technical error committed by the investigating officer not going to the root of the matter would not ordinarily permit rejection of the evidence as a whole. Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 156 V Too serious a view to be adopted on mere variations falling in the narration of an incident (either as between the evidence of two witnesses or as between two statements of the same witness) is an unrealistic approach for judicial scrutiny.

VI By and large a witness cannot be expected to possess a photographic memory and to recall the details of an incident. It is not as if a video tape is replayed on the mental screen. VII Ordinarily it so happens that a witness is overtaken by events. The witness could not have anticipated the occurrence which so often has an element of surprise. The mental faculties therefore cannot be expected to be attuned to absorb the details. VIII The powers of observation differ from person to person. What one may notice, another may not. An object or movement might emboss its image on one person's mind whereas it might go unnoticed on the part of another.

IX By and large people cannot accurately recall a conversation and reproduce the very words used by them or heard by them. They can only recall the main purport of the conversation. It is unrealistic to expect a witness to be a human tape recorder. X In regard to exact time of an incident, or the time duration of an occurrence, usually, people make their estimates by guess work on the spur of the moment at the time of interrogation. And Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 157 one cannot expect people to make very precise or reliable estimates in such matters. Again, it depends on the time-sense of individuals which varies from person to person.

XI Ordinarily a witness cannot be expected to recall accurately the sequence of events which take place in rapid succession or in a short time span. A witness is liable to get confused, or mixed up when interrogated later on.

XII A witness, though wholly truthful, is liable to be overawed by the court atmosphere and the piercing cross examination by counsel and out of nervousness mix up facts, get confused regarding sequence of events, or fill up details from imagination on the spur of the moment. The sub-conscious mind of the witness sometimes so operates on account of the fear of looking foolish or being disbelieved though the witness is giving a truthful and honest account of the occurrence witnessed by him. XIII A former statement though seemingly inconsistent with the evidence need not necessarily be sufficient to amount to contradiction. Unless the former statement has the potency to discredit the later statement, even if the later statement is at variance with the former to some extent it would not be helpful to contradict that witness.

The said principles have been derived from the judgment of Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 158 the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Leela Ram (Dead) through Duli Chand v. State of Haryana & Anr. reported as (1999) 9 SCC 525, Bharwada Bhoginbhai Hirjibhai v. State of Gujarat reported as (1983) 3 SCC 217 and Tahsildar Singh and Anr. V. The State of Uttar Pradesh reported as AIR 1959 SC 1012.

141. A peculiar feature of the instant case which is palpably evident writ lage on the face of the record and even evidenced from the orders of the Hon'ble Supreme Court is that Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav exercised tremendous influence in the region, in as much as even the jail authorities and staff in the Learned Trial Court were successfully influenced by the satanic web of his power. Twenty two (22) witnesses in the case turned hostile and complaints were frequently made before the court about the threats received by them. As highlighted earlier, Kalyan Chandra Sarkar and other witnesses were attacked in prison at the time of Test Identification Parade and a separate case in that regard was also registered. The present case illustratively depicts the deepest abyss of anarchy and collapse in governance and it is in this light that the evidence of the instant case is to be appreciated.

142. The Hon'ble Supreme Court has since time immemorial consistently held that realistic standards must be adopted while evaluating evidence led by the prosecution. Exaggerated devotion Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 159 to the rule of benefit of doubt must not nature fanciful doubts or lingering suspicion and thereby destroy the social defence. Justice cannot be made sterile on the plea that it is better to let hundred guilty escape than punishing innocent. Letting guilty escape is not doing justice according to law. The Apex Court has cautioned that doubts must be reasonable and not imaginary, trivial or mainly possible doubt but a fair doubt based upon reason and common sense to result in acquittal. The prosecution is not expected to answer every fanciful hypothesis put forward by the accused (Gangadhar Behera & Ors. V. State of Orissa reported as (2002) 8 SCC 381). A criminal trial is not like a fairy tale wherein one is free to give fight to one's imagination and fantasy. It concerns itself with the question as to whether the accused arraigned at the trial is guilty of the crime with which he is charged. Crime is an event in real life and is the product of interplay of different human emotions. In arriving at the conclusion about the guilt of the accused charged with the commission of a crime the court has to judge the evidence by the yardstick of probabilities, its intrinsic worth and the animus of witnesses. Every case in the final analysis would have to depend upon its own facts. Although the benefit of every reasonable doubt should be given to the accused, the accused, the courts should not at the same time reject evidence which is ex-facie trustworthy on grounds which are fanciful or in the nature of Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 160 conjectures. It has also been held that defective investigation cannot be made as basis for acquitting the accused if despite such defects and failures of the investigation, a case is made out against the accused (State of U.P. v. Hari Mohan & Ors. Reported as (2000) 8 SCC 598. Even in criminal cases prosecution need not prove its case with absolute certainty and such utopian notion has been expressly rejected (State of Maharashtra v. Mohd. Yakub & Ors. reported as (1980) 3 SCC 57). A Judge does not preside over a criminal trial merely to see that no innocent man is punished. A judge also presides to see that a guilty man does not escape. One is as important as the other. Both are public duties which the judge has to perform (State of U.P. v. Anil Singh reported as AIR 1988 SC 1998). While appreciating cases of circumstantial evidence the Hon'ble Supreme Court has pertinently observed that individual circumstances considered in isolation and divorced from the context of the overall picture emerging from a consideration of the diverse circumstances and their conjoint effect may be themselves appear innocuous. It is only when the various circumstances are considered conjointly that it becomes possible to understand and appreciate their true effect (Shaikh Sattar v. State of Maharashtra reported as (2010) 8 SCC 430). It would be instructive to refer to the profound observations of Hon'ble Mr. Justice Krishna Iyer in Inder Singh & Anr. Vs. the State (Delhi Administration) Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 161 reported as (1978) 4 SCC 161. It was observed-

".....credibility of testimony, oral and circumstantial, depends considerably on a judicial evaluation of the totality, not isolated scrutiny. While it is necessary that proof beyond reasonable doubt should be adduced in all criminal cases, it is not necessary that it should be perfect. If a case is proved too perfectly, It is argued that it is artificial; if a case has some flaws, inevitable because human being are prone to err, it is argued that it is too imperfect. One wonders whether in the meticulous hypersensitivity to eliminate a rare innocent from being punished, many, guilty men must be callously allowed to escape. Proof beyond reasonable doubt is a guideline, not a fetish and guilty man cannot away with it because truth suffers some infirmity when projected through human process. Judicial quest for perfect proof accounts for police presentation of foolproof concoction. Why fake up? Because the court asks for manufacture to make truth look true? No, we must be realistic."
143. With regard to the criticism leveled by Learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants that the witnesses were partisan as they belonged to different political factions i.e. CPI(M) and that their testimony suffered from inherent infirmity, it is respectfully submitted that the Hon'ble Supreme Court has consistently held in a Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 162 catena of judgment that merely because eye witnesses belonged to rival political party does not stamp their evidence ipso facto as untrustworthy. In the present case, the sordid incident was witnessed by Kalyan Chandra Sarkar, (PW-8) who was brother of deceased Ajit Sarkar and admittedly he is not a member of CPI(M). There is no suggestion to the witness that he had political ambitions against Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav and therefore he deposed falsely. The Hon'ble Supreme Court has observed that near relations of the deceased would not falsely implicate innocent persons at the cost of letting the real culprits escape punishment. Reliance is placed upon the decisions of the Apex Court in Dalip Singh & Ors. v. The State of Punjab reported as AIR 1953 SC 364; Bhupendra Singh v. State of Punjab reported as AIR 1968 SC 1438. Evidence reveals that Kalyan Chandra Sarkar (PW8) was retired from service and leading simple life of an agriculturist who had no interest whatsoever in the political activities in the region and no such suggestion has also been given to the said witness. Reliance is placed upon the decisions of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Gosu Jayarami Reddy and Anr. v. State of Andhra Pradesh reported as (2011) 11 SCC 766; Gunnana Pentayya @ Pentadu & Ors. V. State of Andhra Pradesh reported as (2009) 16 SCC 59; Kilakkatha Parambath Sasi & Ors. v. State of Kerala reported as (2011) 4 SCC 552. The said witness has clearly explained Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 163 his presence at the spot that he had come to visit his younger brother- Ajit Sarkar MLA at Purnea from Ranipatra where he resided. It also assumes significance that the said witness in his statement before the CBI does not disclose the name of any assailant and merely describes them. If it is respectfully submitted that if Kalyan Chandra Sarkar (PW8) desired to falsely implicate Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav and his accomplices, he would have named them in his statement before the Investigation Agency itself. The version of this witness stands corroborated by the testimony of Madhusudan Rishi (PW9) and Lal Bahadur Uraon (PW 10) who have also cogently explained their presence at the house of the deceased and merely because they were associated with CPI (M) cannot corrode the value of their evidence which is otherwise consistent with the deposition of Kalyan Chandra Sarkar (PW8) and other independent circumstances- testimony of PW 15 & PW 16, scientific evidence of ballistic experts (PW 28 & PW 33) who opined that AK 47 was used in commission of offence, judicial confession of accused Rajan Tiwari and recovery of two motor cycles used in the commission of offence.

144. It was also strenuously contended on behalf of the appellants that the eye witnesses turned volte face from their previous version before the Bihar Police and after around five months projected and entirely new version which itself destroys the credibility of their Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 164 evidence. It was further submitted that in the interregnum no tangible efforts were made by the said witnesses to lodge a protest before Senior Police Officials or the court against the alleged misdirection of investigation by Bihar Police. It is respectfully submitted that the witnesses when examined before the CBI stated that their signatures were obtained by Bihar Police on 15.06.1998 and they did not read the contents of the said document. It would also be relevant to note that the copy of the FIR registered by PS K. Hat was not supplied to the witnesses as required under section 154 of the Cr.P.C. and Rule 148 of the Bihar Police Manual which requires endorsement of the informant to be taken that he has received the copy of the said FIR. It also assumes significance that the copy of the FIR was transmitted to the court of Ilaqa Magistrate in terms of the requirement of section 157 Cr.P.C. only on 16.06.1998 although the local police claims to have registered the FIR at 10 P.M. on 14.06.1998. A careful perusal of the alleged fardbayan recorded by Bihar Police would reveal that on the overleaf wherein the signature of Kalyan Chandra Sarkar (PW8) and Lal Bahadur Uraoun (PW 10) are obtained by the local police, only the names of the deceased is figuring and names of the assailants are on the other side of the page. Therefore, the version of PW 8 & PW 10 is not inherently incredible and in fact during the course of investigation their version was found to be true upon the judicial confession of accused Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 165 Rajan Tiwari and evidence which was found subsequent thereto. It would also be relevant to note that none of the witnesses were aware of the name of Rajan Tiwari at the time of incident and during investigation and all the said witnesses tendered description of Rajan Tiwari in their respective statements. The particulars of Rajan Tiwari could be deciphered by the CBI only upon his arrest and consequent disclosure before Delhi Police in case FIR No. 122/99 P.S. R.K. Puram wherein he confessed his involvement in the Ajit Sarkar murder case. It is also respectfully submitted that immediately after the incident, on 16.06.1998 the State Government was pleased to appoint Commission of Enquiry in terms of section 3 of Commission of Enquiry Act, 1952. There was a public outcry upon murder of Brij Bihari and Ajit Sarkar, Members of Legislative Assembly in succession in State of Bihar. At the request made on 01.07.1998 by Smt. Madhavi Bose (Sarkar) wife of deceased Ajit Sarkar, the investigation was transferred to CBI. It would be pertinent to note that the said fact is well within the knowledge of the appellants as reflected in the Supplementary Affidavit filed by Harish Kumar Chaudhary in Cr.W.J.C. No. 8/2008 before the High Court of Judicature at Patna. In furtherance thereof, it would be relevant to note that on 11.08.1998 the State Government of Bihar made recommendation in terms of section 6 of Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946 for transfer of investigation to CBI. Therefore, Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 166 since steps had already been embarked upon by the wife of the deceased and the State Government had also constituted a commission of enquiry, it is not unnatural for the witnesses to have not individually preferred a protest before the court or Senior Officials of Bihar Police. In this regard, it would be relevant to note that during cross examination of the relevant witnesses, no question was put on behalf of the accused persons that why no complaint was lodged by the said witnesses before court or Senior Police officials. It was merely asked if any such complaint was lodged. It is respectfully submitted that it was incumbent upon the counsel of the accused to have expressly elicited from the witnesses why no such complain was made and in absence of such questioning the credibility of such witnesses cannot be impeached on such count. Reliance is placed upon the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in State of Uttar Pradesh v. Nahar Singh reported as (1998) 3 SCC 561; Sunil Kumar & Anr. v. State of Rajasthan (2005) 9 SCC 283; Rajinder Pershad (Dead) by L.R.S. v. Darshana Devi (Smt.) reported as (2001) 7 SCC 69; State of U.P. v. Anil Singh reported as AIR 1988 SC 1998. With regard to the evidence of Investigating Officer of Bihar Police A.K. Jha (PW 56) it is respectfully submitted that the said witness had obvious motivations to support his investigation and to save his own skin. As has already been highlighted earlier, for numerous reasons, the assertion of the eye witnesses that Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 167 they did not read the Fard Bayan recorded by A.K. Jha (PW 56) and merely signed the said document appears to have a ring of truth when pitted against the evidence of the said Investigating Officer who carried on the Investigation in the most slip shot/contaminated manner, to say the least, and the State Government was impelled to transfer investigation to CBI being itself dissatisfied with it. The said witness was produced by the prosecution as he was the Investigating Officer of the Bihar Police who had started the Investigating into the offence and the CBI had taken on further Investigation thereafter, so he was required to be produced in all fairness before the Hon'ble Court to unravel the initial phase of investigation, howsoever contaminated it be, as this case was not a case of reinvestigation or fresh investigation in which case the said evidence could have been affected from record as nullity. Furthermore, on merits the testimony of Kalyan Chandra Sarkar (PW 8) has been challenged on the ground that PW 19 Ranu Kumar Singh- a resident of the locality who was the witness to inquest according to Bihar Police, in the very first question in cross examination deposed that he saw that after 45 minutes of his arrival at the spot he saw Kalyan Chandra Sarkar come and scream who had killed his brother. It is therefore contended that Kayan Chandra Sarkar (PW 8) could not be an eye witness to the incident but arrived at the spot much later. It is respectfully submitted that perusal of the Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 168 testimony of this witness indicates that when he arrived at the spot a large crowd had already gathered. It is therefore highly possible that in the said crowd he did not notice Kalyan Chandra Sarkar earlier and his attention towards him was drawn much later. It may be noted that the witness has not deposed that he saw Kalyan Chandra Sarkar alight from the cycle etc. which would demonstrate with certainty that Kalyan Chandra Sarkar arrived at the spot much later. The statement of this witness in response to the very first question in cross examination as such does not possess the potency to rule out the presence of Kalyan Chandra Sarkar at the time of incident. Even otherwise, reliance is placed upon the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Sohan Lal @ Sohan Singh v. State of Punjab reported as (2003) 11 SCC 534 wherein it was held in para 23 that where a formal witness in cross examination deposes a material fact in favour of accused which he curiously omits to state in his statement under section 161 Cr.P.C. then the court may draw the inference that he had been won over by the accused and had deposed designedly to give benefit to the accused. In the present case, PW 19 Ranu Kumar Singh was a mere formal witness to inquest, however in response to the very first question in cross examination he introduces a material fact for the first time that Kalyan Chandra Sarkar arrived after 45 minutes of his reaching the spot. The decision in the said case squarely applies to the facts of the present case Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 169 and in any event the testimony of PW 19 cannot erode the credibility of the eye witnesses examined at the trial.

145. The Learned Counsel for appellant also said challenge to the version of the eye witnesses by submitting that they depose that injured Bodyguard Ramesh Uraon (PW 25) was taken in an ambulance to Sadar Hospital by Kalyan Chandra Sarkar (PW8), however, Ramesh Uraon (PW 25) in his deposition states that he was taken to hospital by one Subhash Singh in a tempo and he did not see Kalyan Chandra Sarkar at the spot. It is respectfully submitted that Kalyan Chandra Sarkar in his cross examination has categorically stated that the ambulance looked like a matador and there is no contradiction as such on this aspect between the testimony of witnesses inter se. Ambulance is merely a nomenclature for a vehicle which carries patients and it is not unusual that in small towns or at times even in cities the same is actually a tempo/matador being used for the said purpose. It would be pertinent to note that Ramesh Uraon was injured in the ghastly ordeal that ensued that day and he survived as he managed to lie down in a bent position in the footrest of the car. It was only after some time that he was taken out from the car by the villagers and he was made to lie on the ground horizontally before being taken to the hospital. It was emerged in evidence that a huge crowd had gathered at the spot and it is quite natural that he may not have noticed Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 170 Kalyan Chandra Sarkar in the crowd as he himself was suffering from excruciating pain. It would also be pertinent to note that it is not the claim of Kalyan Chandra Sarkar that he spoke to Ramesh Uraon at the spot or himself carried him to the ambulance in his hand. Kalyan Chandra Sarkar has deposed that villagers took out Ramesh Uraon from the car. Therefore there is no contradiction which casts doubt upon the presence of Kalyan Chandra Sarkar. It is respectfully submitted that Kalyan Chandra Sarkar was the unfortunate witness to the heart rending murder of his brother in broad daylight. It is rather natural that he was taken over by the events and was in a state of shock at the relevant time. Crowd had gathered and it is safe to assume that necessary steps were being taken by the villagers. Ramesh Uraon was a mere guard of his brother Ajit Sarkar and it is not unnatural for him to have not spoken to him at the scene of occurrence. It would be pertinent to note that there is no cross examination of Kalyan Chandra Sarkar on the aspect as to why he did not speak to Ramesh Uraon at the scene of occurrence. As submitted earlier, in absence of cross examination on a particular aspect specifically credibility of a witness cannot be diminished on that count as it would tantamount to taking a witness by surprise as if the question would have been put to him while he was in witness box, he would have had the opportunity to offer an explanation for the same which would be adjudged by the court on its Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 171 own value. It is further submitted that it has emerged in evidence that Ramesh Uraon (PW 25) was carried in an ambulance and he has deposed that he was accompanied by Subhash Singh. It has also emerged in deposition of Kalyan Chandra Sarkar (PW8) that there were other persons when he went to Sadar Hospital. Therefore, there is no irreconcilable contradiction to discredit the version of Kalyan Chandra Sarkar (PW8). It is quite possible that Kalyan Chandra Sarkar was sitting in front seat of ambulance and Ramesh Uraon who was made to lie in the rear portion of the ambulance could have observed only Subhash Singh who was accompanying him in the said portion.

146. The appellants have also placed heavy reliance upon the testimony of Madhumita Yadav (DW 21) daughter of Kalyan Chandra Sarkar (PW8) who was wife of Raj Kumar Yadav @ Raju Yadav and deposed that on the day of incident she was present at the house of her father at Ranipatra although her husband was supposed to be operated on that day for a disease not known to her and had to be taken to Patna by train at 7 pm from Katihar. She deposed that at 5 pm on that day she was still present at the house at Ranipatra when someone whom she does not remember informed that Ajit Sarkar had been killed and it was thereafter that her father left for Purnea. It was deposed by her that she had visited the house of her father to collect money for treatment of her husband; however Kalyan Chandra Sarkar Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 172 (PW8) had denied the said fact in his cross examination and had deposed that his daughter had not visited him on the day of incident and in fact she had collected money for the surgery of her husband from Ajit Sarkar some days prior to the incident. Kalyan Chandra Sarkar deposed that he did not himself give her money as her husband was a drunkard and he himself was also not financially very sound. It is respectfully submitted that reasons for such testimony of his witness are not hard to seek. The said witness is a pliable witness for the defence but not a reliable witness for the court. It was revealed during cross examination by the Learned Special Public Prosecutor that the said witness was the wife of Raju Yadav who was the associate of Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav and that she had performed a love marriage with him and therefore had obvious motivations to lie, especially after the death of her father Kalyan Chandra Sarkar on 06.02.2005. It would also be relevant to note that this witness has deposed after nearly a decade of the incident and that at no time she made any statement to any authority/court about her version of events and that her father was lying.

147. It has been contended on behalf of the appellants that there was excessive delay in holding TIP and therefore identification of the Appellant Rajan Tiwari by witnesses in Beur Jail was of no consequence. It is respectfully submitted that the Hon'ble Supreme Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 173 Court has observed that no abstract time limit can be laid down for holding TIP and mere delay in conducting the same cannot lead to rejection of evidence of the witnesses. Reliance is placed upon the judgment of the Apex Court reported as (1994) 1 SCC 413 titled Brij Mohan & Ors. v. State of Rajasthan, AIR 2012 SC (Criminal) 1034 titled Munna Kumar Upadhyay @ Munna v. State of Andhra Pradesh and 2001 CriLJ 1268 titled Daya Singh v. State of Haryana. It cannot be lost sight that the witnesses had ample opportunity in sufficient day light to witness the incident and the same would have any enduring impression upon their memory. It also assumes significance that the witnesses in their statement to the CBI also consistently gave description of Rajan Tiwari and therefore the mere fact that there was some delay in conducting TIP after bringing accused Rajan Tiwari to Bihar is of no consequence. It would also be pertinent to note that all the three eye witnesses correctly identified the accused in TIP and the accused Rajan Tiwari had not objected to the conduct of the said TIP on the ground that he was shown to the witnesses etc. It is also significant that the eye witnesses reside at Ranipatra whereas the accused Rajan Tiwari was lodged at jail in Patna. Therefore, the argument that the accused was shown to witnesses has no legs.

148. It has also been contended that during the interregnum the witnesses may have had the opportunity to see the Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 174 photograph of the accused as it was published in newspaper. It is respectfully submitted that it was positively emerged in evidence that the witnesses did not see any photograph in the newspaper and in fact Times of India (in which photograph was alleged to have been published) was not widely circulated in the small town of Ranipatra where the witnesses resided. The accused have not led any evidence to rebut the said evidence and therefore this argument is also liable to be rejected. Reliance is placed upon the decision of the Hon'ble Kerala High Court in Sajeevan and Ors. v. State of Kerala reported as 1994 CriLJ 1316 wherein it was observed by KT Thomas, J. (as he was then) that it is not necessary that witnesses see photograph in the newspaper and the mere fact of publication of photograph in journalistic exuberance cannot throw overboard the evidence of a witness. Motive of Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav successfully proved by the prosecution.

149. It is respectfully submitted that the prosecution has proved beyond shadow of doubt that the appellant Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav, had developed a deep rooted political rivalry against Ajit Sarkar and had been a cause of ire in the mind of appellant Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav, which is manifested by his proclamation in public gatherings that if he would win the election he would kill Ajit Sarkar in his house and if he would lose he would kill Ajit Sarkar. Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 175 Ultimately, Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav lost the election and Ajit Sarkar had acted against the party whips by not supporting Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav. As highlighted earlier, there was clash in political stand points of the two as Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav supported the landlords and Ajit Sarkar spearheaded the cause of landless cultivators. Ajit Sarkar had also raised questions on the floor of the House against the derelictions of Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav and it can be safely inferred that these factors cumulatively impelled Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav to author the conspiracy to kill Ajit Sarkar with a view to fuel his political ambitions and the said conspiracy was successfully executed by his henchmen. The said facts emerge from the testimony of Ravindar Nath Singh (PW7), Madhusudan Rishi (PW9), Lal Bahadur Uraon (PW 10) and Subodh Yadav (PW20).

Inter se proximity between the conspirators and the factum of being in constant touch near the time of incident.

150. As highlighted earlier a photograph (material exhibit

7) was recovered from the bedroom of the house of accused Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav wherein Rajan Tiwari can be seen standing in company of Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav and his family at some hill station. The said photograph was recovered by CBI on 17.02.1999 in pursuance of a search conducted after duly obtaining search warrants. Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 176 It has also emerged in the judicial confession of accused Rajan Tiwari that in the morning Harish Chaudhary made Rajan Tiwari speak to Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav from telephone installed at house of Pappu Yadav in Purnea to his telephone in his house at Delhi. After commission of the crime the assailants visited the house of Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav and returned the weapons used in the commission of offence. Thereafter, Rajan Tiwari and Amar Yadav went to Katihar from where Rajan Tiwari made a phone call to residence of Pappu Yadav in Delhi from a PCO Booth. Rajan Tiwari thereafter spent some days in Siliguri and Darjeeling and from there he went to house of Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav located at 9, Harish Chandra Mathur Lane at New Delhi. The family of Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav along with Rajan Tiwari visited Patnitop and Vaishno Devi. The said facts stand corroborated as true by the call detail records and the photograph recovered by CBI. Pratap Yadav (PW1) who was earlier bodyguard of Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav for 3-4 years although for reasons which are not hard to seek turned turtle in witness box and was declared hostile by the prosecution, however admitted that accused Anil Yadav would constantly meet accused Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav during the period of elections. The said fact is also deposed by Madhusudan Rishi (PW9) and Lal Bahadur Uraon (PW 10). Therefore, the prosecution has successfully proved the factum of Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 177 proximity between the appellants before this Hon'ble Court and reliance is placed upon the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court repoted as (2010) 6 SCC 1 titled Sidhartha Vashishth @ Manu Sharma v. State (NCT of Delhi) wherein it was pertinently observed that the fact the accused persons were in constant touch after the commission of offence was a highly relevant circumstance that the court would take into consideration and the contention that the contents of the conversation were not known would not impair its relevance.

151. It would also be apposite to refer to the erudite observations of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Firozuddin Basheeruddin and Ors. v. State of Kerala reported as (2001) 7 SCC 596 wherein the law with regard to conspiracy has been dealt in extensio and admissibility of evidence in regard to conspiracies under section 10 Indian Evidence Act that introduces the dimension of ‗vicarious liability' in conspiracy prosecutions has been reiterated after taking stock of catena of judgments of the Apex Court.

It has been observed:

"....Conspiracy is not only a substantive crime. It also serves as a basis for holding one person liable for the crimes of others in cases where applications of the usual doctrines of complicity would not render that person liable. Thus, one who enters into a conspiratorial relationship is Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 178 liable for every reasonably foreseeable crime committed by every other member of the conspiracy in furtherance of its objectives, whether or not he knew of the crimes or aided in their commission. The rationale is that criminal acts done in furtherance of a conspiracy may be sufficiently dependent upon the encouragement and support of the group as a whole to warrant treating each member as a casual agent to each act...
.....Regarding admissibility of evidence, loosened standards prevail in a conspiracy trial. Contrary to the usual rule, in conspiracy prosecutions an declaration by one conspirator, made in furtherance of a conspiracy and during its pendency, is admissible against each co-conspirator. Despite the unreliability of hearsay evidence, it is admissible in conspiracy prosecutions. Conspirators are liable on an gency theory for statements of co-conspirators, just as they are for the overt acts and crimes committed by their confreres..."
False and Bald denial in statement under section 313 Cr.P.C. by the appellants leading to an additional circumstance in the chain of evidence.

152. It is respectfully submitted that appellant Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav has made prevaricating statements in his Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 179 examination under section 313 Cr.P.C. and also made bald denial of questions put to him by the Court. In response to question No. 6, Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav has stated that he came to know Rajan Tiwari when he became a Member Legislative Assembly from Govind Ganj Constituency and did not know him earlier. Percontra, in response to question no. 19, the appellant Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav gives a carte blanche denial that he does not know any Rajan Tiwari. The appellant Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav has also taken a stand that he could not hear statement of any witnesses through video conferencing facility, which is palpably false as the Learned Trial Court while commencing recording of proceedings on every date would ensure that accused Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav was available through the video conference link from Tihar Jail. The other appellants have tendered a bald denial to the incriminatory circumstances emerging in evidence against them, much less rendered any plausible explanation. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in catena of judgments has held that false explanations and bald denial by accused persons add as an additional circumstance to the chain of cirumstantial evidence and supply the missing link, if any. Reliance is placed uponthe judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Joseph v. State of Kerala reported as (2000) 5 SCC 197; State of Maharashtra v. Suresh reported as (2000) 1 SCC 471; Anthony D' Souza and others. v. State of Karnataka reported as Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 180 (2003) 1 SCC 259 and Munna Kumar Upadhyay (Supra).


Submission on behalf of P.W. 9

153. Learned counsel for P.W. 9 submitted that confession of Rajan Tiwary, Ext. 35 is detailed confession as therein he has not only indicated his introduction to the criminal world but also about the different crimes which he executed and appears to be voluntary in nature. Reliance in this connection is placed on the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Henry Westmuller Roberts etc. etc. Vs. State of Assam and others etc., AIR 1985 Supreme Court 823, paragraphs 4, 17, 30, 31, 33 and Shankaria Vs. State of Rajasthan, AIR 1978 Supreme Court 1248, paragraph 52.

154. Learned counsel for P.W. 9 submitted that confession of Rajan Tiwary stands corroborated by three empty cartridges recovered from the place of occurrence, Ext. 9, two steel core portion recovered from the Car on 3.3.1999, Ext. 10. Reliance in this connection has been placed on the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Abdulvahab Abdulmajid Shaikh and others Vs. State of Gujarat, 2007(4) SCC 257. In connection with 313 Cr.P.C. statement of the accused persons learned counsel for P.W. 9 relied on the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Alister Anthony Pareira Vs. State of Maharashtra, 2012(1) PLJR 290(SC), paragraphs 14, 15, 49, 52, 59. Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 181 Learned counsel for P.W. 9 distinguished the judgment in the case of Sarwan Singh (supra) with reference to paragraph 10 of the said judgment wherefrom it appears that the accused who recorded his confessional statement had blood stained cloths and visible sign of injury and that is why confession made by him was not accepted by the court.

155. Learned counsel for P.W. 9 next relied on the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Krishna Mochi and others Vs. State of Bihar, (2002) 6 SCC 81, paragraphs 31, 32, Dayal Singh and others Vs. State of Uttaranchal, (2012) 8 SCC 263, paragraph 21 and submitted that even one truthful witness is sufficient to hold the accused persons guilty of the crime.

156. Learned counsel for P.W. 9 also pointed out that investigation made by Sri A.K. Jha, P.W. 56 was not satisfactory which would be evident from the fact that he obtained warrant against Amar Yadav, Anil Yadav and Sanjay Rai on 27.6.1998 but did not execute the same until 12.8.1998 when he only examined Sanjay Rai under Section 164 Cr.P.C. and having examined Sanjay Rai did not take him in custody which would be evident from paragraphs 26, 27, 32 of the evidence of P.W. 56.

157. Learned counsel for P.W. 9 also referred to the report of P.W. 17 who conducted failed T.I.P. on 1.5.1999 and submitted that Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 182 the accused persons were so influential that they did not even allow the T.I.P. to be conducted inside the jail premises.

158. Learned counsel for P.W. 9 also referred to the evidence of P.W. 8, paragraph 16 and submitted that as P.W. 8 apprehended his own killing he did not report the matter to the local police. He also referred to paragraph 17 of the evidence of P.W. 8 where P.W. 8 stated that in spite of being provided with Bodyguard he remained fearful and did not give information even to the Court about his place of stay at Patna where he had come to depose in the trial. He also referred to order dated 9.4.2003 passed by the trial court whereunder orders were passed to provide security to P.W. 9.

159. Learned counsel for P.W. 9 also referred to the evidence of P.W. 10, paragraphs 3, 4 and submitted that C.B.I. was directed to provide security to P.W. 10.

160. Learned counsel for P.W. 9 also referred to the evidence of Ravindra Nath Singh, P.W. 7 that deceased Ajit Sarkar had raised question in the Assembly about the connivance of the jail staff with appellant Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav when he was allowed to go to Purnia though he was not granted bail in a kidnapping case.

161. Learned counsel also referred to the evidence of Sri G.S. Saini, P.W. 59 paragraph 42 whereunder the witness stated that had Rajan Tiwary declined to record his confessional statement he would Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 183 have been sent to jail.

162. With reference to paragraph 96 of the evidence of P.W. 59 learned counsel submitted that P.W. 59 stated in court that he did not see any visible mark of injury on the person of Rajan Tiwary.

163. Learned counsel for P.W. 9 also distinguished the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Machhandar(supra) and submitted that the confession was not relied upon in the said case as the same was not brought to the notice of the accused while recording his statement.

164. Learned counsel for P.W. 9 reiterated the aforesaid submission also filed written submission stating that eye witnesses who had come for test identification parade were assaulted by accused in the present case of the police and the Magistrate in jail. Such was their clout and signal to the other witnesses that any one coming to depose against them would be harmed. The first six witnesses of C.B.I. turned hostile. At final count more than a third, that is 22 out of the total 61 witnesses turned hostile. Learned counsel also placed reliance in the written submission on the judgment of the Supreme Court in the judgment reported in 2005(3) SCC 284 in which Supreme Court noticed the fact that even after being lodged in jail the nefarious activities of Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav continued unawaited and he was made accused in a case under Section 302 I.P.C.

Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 184

165. Learned counsel for P.W.9 also submitted that Rajan Tiwary recorded his 313 Cr.P.C. statement on 23.11.2006 in which Rajan Tiwary categorically denied to have made any judicial confession and stated that C.B.I. merely took his signature on blank paper. In this connection, it has been pointed out in the written submission that Rajan Tiwary made three retractions on 1.3.1999, 30.3.1999 and 1.5.1999. In first two retractions he had hinted at pressure from the C.B.I. which led him to make confession although with respect to the first retraction it is submitted that it was made in connection with some other case and not the present case. In the background of the contents of the three retractions learned counsel for P.W. 9 submitted that Rajan Tiwary having denied to have made any statement it clearly implies that P.W. 59 fabricated the confession. In view of the allegation of fabrication of confession the procedural shortcomings in the recording of the confession would be wiped out. Any objection to the manner of recording of confession cannot be taken and can certainly not be entertained in view of the statement of Rajan Tiwary that he did not make any statement. According to learned counsel what is required to be sen is whether P.W. 59 fabricated the confession which cannot be believed even for a memoent as the Metropolitan Magistrate a Judicial Officer uninterested in the case having no axe to grind testified before the court that he recorded the confession of Rajan Tiwary after Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 185 observing the safeguards there is no reason why the evidence of the Judicial Officer should not be accepted.

166. It is further submitted that this Court should place reliance on the confessional statement as it is not only voluntary but also trustworthy for the following reasons :


(a) The confession is full of facts and minute details which would only be known to the maker of the statement and none else. The very fact of the statement studded with such vivid details which only perpetrator of the crime would know, makes it spontaneous and voluntary which cannot be the result of tutoring, coercion or interpolation nor has been suggested by or on behalf of the appellants. In this regard reliance can be placed on the judgment of Henry Westmuller Versus State of Assam AIR 1985 SC 823 ( 3 Judges) and Shankaria Versus State of Rajasthan AIR 1978 SC 1248 (3 Judges).
(b) Not only does A3 speak in great detail about the crime in question but he also gives vivid details about his activities prior to this occurrence, particularly the other crimes in which he was involved. These details could not have been tutored to him by the CBI.

(c) All the necessary requirements have been fulfilled by the Magistrate P.W. 59 G.S. Saini who has recorded the confession Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 186 and after satisfying himself that the same is being made voluntarily he has gone on to record the same. A bare reading of the confessional statement along with the evidence of P.W.59 is a definite indicator of the fact that the learned Magistrate had complied with all the formalities of Section 164 of Cr.P.C.

(d) The requirement under section 164 (2) of Cr.P.C. that the Magistrate before recording any such confession would explain to the person making it that he is not bound to make a confession and that if he does so it may be used as evidence against him, has been completely fulfilled by the Magistrate (P.W. 59) as when the accused was produced before him while he was holding court, he had asked the accused to go to his chamber, where he was all alone, and gave him one hour time to think over. Even after giving him warning on three different occasions that the statement that he was making could be used against him, accused Rajan Tiwari had insisted on making the statement. Thus the Magistrate had all reasons to believe that the statement was being made voluntarily. It is submitted that the appellants also do not suggest that no sufficient warning had been given to A3 by the learned Magistrate.

(e) As regards the issue of time for reflection is concerned, the Courts have time and again held that no straight jacket formula Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 187 can be applied and it will depend on the facts and circumstances of the case. The argument advanced by the appellants that at least 24 hours time should have been given ( in the light of Sarwan Singh Judgment, AIR 1957 SC 637) does not hold good in the facts of the present case and as has been also discussed in Henry Westmuller case and in the case of Shankaria versus State of Rajasthan AIR 1978 SC 1248 ( 3 Judges). The facts in Sarwan Singh case were materially different in as much as there were evidence of visible marks of injuries on the person making the confession and clothes were also blood stained, while in the case at hand as per the evidence of P.W.59 he has categorically submitted before the court that there were no visible marks of injuries on his person. Thus there was subjective satisfaction of the Magistrate that the person was not forced or coerced into making the statement, which is the requirement of law.

(f) In Shankaria case the Apex Court has in crystal clear terms laid down that there is nothing in statutory provision in Section 164 Cr.P.C. or elsewhere, or even executive direction issued by the High Court that there should be an interval of 24 hours or more between the preliminary questioning of the accused and recording of his confession and how much time for reflection Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 188 should be allowed to an accused person before recording his confession is a question which depends on the facts and circumstances of each case.

(g) The appellant has neither before the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate on 22.02.1999 and on 23.02.1999 ( while he was being sent for judicial custody) as well as before P.W. 59 on 22.02.1999 complained of any police torture, undue influence or coercion or that the confession was put in his mouth by someone else.

(h) The subsequent retraction by Rajan Tiwari in the present case does not benefit him at all and rather the same can be read against him. This is so because the retraction does not come at the immediate instance. The first so-called retraction dated 01.03.1999 is silent about the confessional statement dated 22.02.1999. It rather relates more specifically to a different case. This gets aggravated from the fact that he was produced by the Delhi Police for extension of his judicial remand on 26.02.1999 before the Magistrate and he has not complained that the confession dated 22.02.1999 was obtained from him by using illegal methods. He was then produced in Court, in the presence of his advocate, on 09.03.1999 before the Magistrate by CBI but still, for the reasons best known to him, he has not even Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 189 remotely whispered anything to suggest that the said confession was not in his words. As such his first retraction comes after a gap of more than one month i.e. on 31.03.1999 from Jail and then the second one on 21.04.1999. As such on this belated retraction no reliance can be placed.

(i) It is submitted that merely because confession was retracted, it need not be taken as confession under pressure nor any such presumption can be raised. State of mind of accused is a relevant factor. All precautions were taken and all formalities were complied with. All confessions are retracted at a later stage and rather the Hon'ble Apex Court has observed that confession not being retracted is a rarity. Therefore it is not a ground to discard confession. Reliance is placed on Abdulvahab Abdulmajid Shaikh Vs. State of Gujarat (2007) 4 SCC 257.

(j) The plea of the appellants that the confession has not been signed by the maker on all the pages does not hold water in light of the judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court in State of Tamilnadu versus Nalini AIR 1999 SC 2640 (3 Judges) where it has been held that there is no requirement in law that the confession should be signed by the maker on all the pages and requirement of law is that confession should be signed by its maker at the end of confession. It may be added here that in Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 190 Nalini's case despite the fact that the signature was missing on the last two pages the confession was accepted as voluntary.

(k) As per as the argument by the appellants with regard to Section 30 of the Evidence Act goes, it is to be submitted that as on date, the aforesaid provision is very much there in the statute and unless declared ultra vires the same has to be applied in the manner the statute provides. In AIR 1970 SC 45 (Md. Hussain Umar Kochra etc. Vrs. K.S. Dalipsinghji and another), the Apex Court has observed that case of retracted confession of co- accused, u/s 30 Evidence Act, Court can take into consideration such confessions although it cannot be made foundation of the conviction. As such it is to be seen that there is nothing in law which precludes from using the confession of the maker against the co-accused with certain other corroborating circumstances.

(l) Further it is not open to the appellants to plead that the tenor of confession shows that it is exculpatory because the mere reading of the same would clearly demonstrate that the maker had played active role in the whole incident and he knew what the object of the conspiracy was. Therefore, his knowledge and participation in the commission of the offence remains undisputed as per his statement.

(m) The defence / appellants have raised contradictory pleas Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 191 regarding the confession. On one hand it has been argued that the confession was recorded under pressure, secondly they have raised a plea that the signature of Rajan Tiwari were taken on blank papers and thirdly it has also been argued that there was fabrication and interpolation in the confession i.e. Exhibit 35. All these run contrary to each other because if fabrication was required then there was no need to get signature on blank papers or use force/ coercion / threat etc. The said pleas, it is submitted, are destructive of each other.

(n) In the statement recorded under section 313 of Cr.P.C. appellant Rajan Tiwari has made a blanket statement that no such confessional statement was recorded / given by him. This has no value in as much as it gain runs contrary to all his previous stands in this regard. It is submitted that the A3 has in this regard failed to take a clear and explicit stand. Reference to Abdulvahab Abdul Majid Shaikh Case (Supra).

(o) In fact, the statement of Rajan Tiwari under Section 313 of the Cr.P.C. would have the effect of completely wiping out his three retractions as false and untrue because the implication of his this statement is that the MM had fabricated the confession, which cannot be believed.

(p) Another argument raised on behalf of the appellants challenging Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 192 the confession on the ground that no legal assistance was provided to A3 before his confession was recorded is completely unacceptable in view of the recent judgment of the Apex Court in the case of Md. Ajmal Amir Kasab versus State of Maharashtra (2012) 9 SCC 1. It has been clearly held failure to provide a counsel at the pre-trial stage would not have the effect of vitiating the trial.

164(2) & 164(3)

(q) It is respectfully submitted that the submission of the appellants that sub-section 3 of Section 164 Cr.P.C. has to be read into Section 164(2) is not legally tenable. Moreover, it is not a pre- requisite for the Magistrate to give a prior warning to the person making the confession that if he refuses to make the confession then he will not be sent into police custody rather he will be sent into judicial custody. There is, it is urged, no such legal requirement. It is submitted that the provisions of Section 164(3) are clear, explicit and do not call for any other interpretation. This is so because on the plain reading of Section 164(3) it is clear that only when the person appearing before the Magistrate ‗states' that he does not want to make the confession, the Magistrate is duty bound not to authorize further detention of that person in police custody. Even if a different interpretation of Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 193 the same is taken to mean that assurance has to be given prior to recording of confession whether or not he declines to give the statement, no adherence to the same would not render the confession as involuntary in view of the substantial compliance of the procedural requirements coupled with the satisfaction of the Magistrate regarding its truth and voluntariness. Reference in this regard be made to deposition of P.W.59 paragraph 81 Page 651 & 652.

(r) The matter relating to admissibility of any evidence brought before a court of law and / or relevance thereof is governed by the provisions of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872.

Section 24 of the Evidence Act provides that a confession made by an accused by way of inducement, threat or promise would become irrelevant in criminal proceedings. Section 25 makes any confession made before a police officer to be wholly inadmissible in evidence. Section 29 of the Indian Evidence Act, however, deal with confession, which is otherwise relevant in the following terms:

―29. Confession otherwise relevant not to become irrelevant because of promise of secrecy, etc. - If such a confession is otherwise relevant, it does not become irrelevant merely because it was made under a promise of secrecy, or in consequence of a Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 194 deception practiced on the accused person for the purpose of obtaining it, or when he was drunk, or because it was made in answer to questions which he need not have answered, whatever may have been the form of those questions, or because he was not warned that he was not bound to make such confession, and that evidence of it might be given against him.‖
(s) The provisions of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 are substantive in nature; whereas loosely speaking, the provisions relating to confession made in the Code is procedural in nature, although it is not suggested mean that the requirement of rendering warning could be a mere formality.
(t) It is also true that having regard to the expanded right of the accused as envisaged under Article 21 of the Constitution of India, every person accused of an offence has a fundamental right to be given such warnings but it does not mean that an accused would claim a right which is not envisaged in law.
Certain provisions of the Code in this connection may be noticed:

― 164(2) The Magistrate shall, before recording any such confession, explain to the person making it that he is not bound to make a confession and that, if he does so, it may be used as evidence against him; and the Magistrate shall not record Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 195 any such confession unless, upon questioning the person making it, he has reason to believe that it is being made voluntarily.
(3) If at any time before the confession is recorded, the person appearing before the Magistrate states that he is not willing to make the confession, the Magistrate shall not authorise the detention of such person in police custody.
463. Non- compliance with provisions of section 164 or section 281.

(1) If any Court before which a confession or other statement of an accused person recorded, or purporting to be recorded under section 164 or section 281, is tendered, or has been received, in evidence finds that any of the provisions of either of such sections have not been complied with by the Magistrate recording the statement, it may, notwithstanding anything contained in section 91 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), take evidence in regard to such noncompliance, and may, if satisfied that such non-compliance has not injured the accused in his defence on the merits and that he duly made the statement recorded, admit such statement. (2) The provisions of this section apply to Courts of appeal, reference and revision.‖ (u) Sub-section 3 of Section 164 of the Code, ipso facto does not Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 196 contain any statutory warning which must be given to the accused which has otherwise been provided in sub-section 2 of Section 164 of the Code. Broadly stated, therefore, whereas sub- section 2 of Section 164 of the Code is couched in mandatory terms; sub-section 3 of Section 164 of the Code restricts the power of the Magistrate to authorize the detention of the accused in police custody. It may not be necessary for us to consider the options open to the Magistrate if the accused does not express his willingness to make the confession. Suffice it to say that on a plain reading it appears that sub-section 3 of Section 164 of the Code does not mandate that the magistrate must give a pre- warning to the accused, who has been brought before him to make a confession.

(v) Even sub-section 2 of Section 164 although couched in mandatory term, Section 463 of the Code makes such an omission to be an irregularity, which can be explained otherwise by the Magistrate himself, in the event the Sessions Judge calls upon him to do so. Sub-sections 2 and 3 of Section 164, therefore, stand on different footings.

(w) A distinction must also be borne in mind with regard to the admissibility and inadmissibility of a confession. Whereas Sections 24 and 25 of the Indian Evidence Act makes the Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 197 confession made by an accused wholly inadmissible if the foundational facts in relation thereto are proved, Section 29 makes such a confession made before a Magistrate admissible, although no warning had been given to the accused.

(x) It is one thing to say that the prosecution is precluded from bringing the confession of a accused on record being inadmissible in character, but it is another thing to say that such confession may be admissible in evidence, but whether a judgment of conviction can be recorded on the sole basis of such confession or not would fall within the realm of appreciation of evidence. For the aforementioned purpose, the Court is entitled to consider such confession from various circumstances. It is submitted that in this case, the confession coupled with the other evidence available on record is sufficient to record a finding of conviction, as has rightly been done by the learned trial court. (y) Some decisions of the consequence of alleged / purported failure on the part of the learned Magistrate to give warning to the effect that he would not sent back to the police custody, if he does not make the confession may be noticed.

(z) In Dagdu Vs. State of Maharashtra (1977) 3 SCC 68, a three judge bench of the Apex Court stated the law in the following terms:

Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 198 ―51. Learned counsel appearing for the State is right that the failure to comply with s. 164 (3), Criminal Procedure Code, or with the High Court Circulars will not render the confessions inadmissible in evidence. Relevancy and admissibility of evidence have to be determined in accordance with the provisions of the Evidence Act. Section 29 of that Act lays down that if a confession is otherwise, relevant it does not become irrelevant merely because, inter alia, the accused was not warned that he was not bound to make it and the evidence of it might be given against him. If, there -fore, a confession does not violate any one of the conditions operative under ss. 24 to 28 of the Evidence Act, it will be admissible in evidence.
But as in respect of any other admissible evidence, oral or documentary, so in the case of confessional statements which are otherwise admissible, the Court has still to consider whether they can be accepted as true. If the facts and circumstances surrounding the making of a confession appear to cast a doubt on the veracity or voluntariness of the confession, the Court may refuse to act upon the confession even if it is admissible in evidence. That shows how important it is for the Magistrate who records the confession to satisfy him- self by appropriate questioning of the confessing accused, Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 199 that the confession is true and voluntary. A strict and faithful compliance with s. 164 of the Code and with the instructions issued by the High Court affords in a large measure the guarantee that the confession is voluntary. The failure to observe the safeguards prescribed therein are in practice calculated to impair the evidentiary value of the confessional statements.‖ (aa) Having regard to the evidence of the Magistrate that he did not comply with the requirements of Section 164, the confessions of the approvers was not accepted. Each case, it is urged, must be considered on its own facts.

(bb) The Supreme Court in Rabindra Kumar Pal (Dara Singh) case (2011) 2 SCC 490, on which strong reliance has been placed by the appellants, referred to its earlier decision in Dagdu (supra). It is submitted that sub-para

(v) of para 64 of the judgment do not reflect the correct position of law as stated in Dagdu (supra) and other cases. The Apex Court in Rabindra Pal (Supra) should not be considered to have laid down any law which would render the requirements (if any) of informing the accused as to his right that he would not be remanded to the police custody in the event he does not make a confession Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 200 subsumed into sub-section 2 of Section 164 of the Code. (cc) It will bear repetition to state that they stand on different footings and must be read disjunctively and not conjunctively.

(dd) Moreover, if the Court finds any inconsistency between the two decisions, it is well settled that the decision of a three judge bench shall prevail over a decision of a two judge bench, for the reason that it could not have overruled the decision of a larger bench and / or was otherwise bound to follow the same.

(ee) That being the law with regard to the law of precedence, it may not be correct to contend that sub-section 3 of Section 164 of the Code provides for any requirement of a pre-warning and in the event of failure on the part of the Ld. Magistrate to give such pre-warning, the same would make the judgment of conviction and sentence liable to be reversed.

(ff) Furthermore, in Rabindra Kumar Pal (Supra), it does not appear, that the applicability of the provisions of Section 29 of the Indian Evidence Act as also 463 of the Code had been taken into consideration.

(gg) It may be noticed that there are some judgments, which Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 201 make the provisions of Section 29 prevail over the provisions of Section 164 of the Code. See Rangappa Hanamappa and Anr. Vs. State reported in AIR 1954 Bombay 285 (para 21), Vellamoonji Goundan Vs. Emperor AIR 1932 Madras 431. In Emperor Vs. Jamuna Singh and others reported in AIR 1947 Patna 305, a two judge bench differed on their opinion with regard to interpretation of Section 164 of the Code vis-à-vis Section 29 of the Evidence Act (see paras 11 and 35 for the conflicting opinion). In that case a re-trial was ordered. (hh) Yet again in State Vs. Mittoo, death Reference No. 3 of 76 Delhi High Court in a judgment reported in MANU / OR/005 of 1978 laid emphasis on Section 29 of the Evidence Act. See also 1982 Crl. LJ 269, ILR 1962 Madhya Bharat 133, 1954 Crl. LJ 887: AIR 1954 Bom 285 at 290 and 292, view of Rai J, in 1947 Patna 305 dissented from.

(ii) What, in law, is needed that the confession should be a voluntary one and all warnings are necessary so that the Ld. Magistrate satisfy himself that the same was being made voluntarily. Absence of warning under Section 164 (3) of the Code would not make confession inadmissible Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 202 provided that accused knows that what is stated shall be recorded and it would be used in evidence against him (2005) 1 Andhra Legal Decisions (Crl.) 900 : (2005) 2 Andhra LT (Crl) 200 DB.

(jj) It is further pertinent to mention here that Rajan Tiwari has a background where he is an accused in large number of cases, including murder cases and has been facing trial. Therefore this is not a person who can be expected to be ignorant and oblivious to the provisions of law, particularly those which concerns the rights of an accused. Further, a bare reading of his retraction dated 30.03.2011, which was written by him and not by his counsel, shows that he had a clear understanding of the niceties of law as he is well aware of the various provisions of law, including Section 164 of the CrPC. What is further pertinent to note is that A3 had access to legal advise almost immediately after the confession was recorded as the order sheets of the Ld. MM of dates subsequent to the recording of the confession demonstrate.

(kk) It is further submitted that if the interpretation sought to be given by the appellants to Section 164 of reading Section 164(3) into Section 164(2) is to be accepted then Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 203 it would become a handle for misuse in the hands of criminals, particularly hardened criminals like the accused of this case. In every case where the IO obtains police custody of an accused, the accused would straightaway say that he desires to give a judicial confession but no sooner is he brought before the Magistrate and the Magistrate tells him that in case of refusal to give confession, he would not be sent to police custody but judicial custody, he would straightaway refuse to give confession and then the Magistrate would have no option but to send him to judicial custody. This would thus become a handle for veteran criminals to avoid police custody. Such can certainly not be the import of the law. It is therefore necessary that the provisions of Section 164(2) and 164(3) should be read reasonably to avoid such consequences.

(ll) The common thread running through almost all the judgments of the Hon'ble Supreme Court as well as various Hon'ble High Courts is that there must be a satisfaction that the confession was voluntary. That is the only test. Even alleged non adherence to various procedural safeguards can never be sufficient to disbelieve Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 204 a confession if the court is otherwise satisfied that the confession was voluntary.

167. The other factors which corroborate the confessional statement of Rajan Tiwary according to learned counsel for P.W. 9 are as follows:-

(i) In this case confessional statement is supported by the disclosure cum pointing out memo (Ext. 43/1) of Rajan Tiwary whereupon facts have been discovered in support thereof.
(ii) Both the confessional statement as well as the aforesaid disclosure statement also point out that there was a deep rooted political rivalry between Pappu Yadav and deceased Ajit Sarkar.
(iii) The other instance that lends support to the confession and which also figure in the disclosure statement made by Rajan Tiwari is the phone records. He has categorically stated in both the statements that he had a talk on telephone with Pappu Yadav on 14.06.98 before the incident and after the incident. In this regard the prosecution has brought on record the print out (Exhibit 3 and 4) of the telephone of Pappu Yadav's Delhi residence and his Arjun Bhawan residence at Purnia as well as the PCO booth at Katihar. Further the witnesses have also been examined in this Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 205 regard who support the case of the prosecution. It has also come on record that Rajan Tiwari had himself stated that he had made a phone call at the residence of Pappu Yadav at Delhi and then at his residence at Gorakhpur from the Katihar PCO (Anand PCO/ Naiyer PCO) on 14.02.98 after the commission of the crime. This fact finds support in the telephone printouts showing that there was a telephonic conversation between Pappu Yadav and Rajan Tiwari just prior to and after the commission of crime. Telephone calls indicating conversation between Pappu Yadav ( at Delhi) and Rajan Tiwary ( at Anand PCO / Naiyer PCO of Ramnani, Kathihar) [ P.W.6, 12 and 52] { Ext. 3 series, 4, 32} - at times in close proximity of the commission of the crime. Attention is also invited to the statement of P.W.12 and P.W. 52 para 6 pg 395 in this regard.
(iv) These documents relating to telephone calls in the form of print outs have been obtained in ordinary course of activity of the computer and proved by the concerned official who has procured the same in regular course of his official duties. Hence, these print outs are admissible in evidence and there is no reason to doubt the same.
(v) It is submitted that the telephone records might not Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 206 be of much help, if seen in isolation, but when seen in the context of the confessional statement and the statement of eye witnesses, it becomes a very important piece of evidence. It clearly corroborates the confessional statement.
(vi) The recovery of red coloured bullet motorcycle on the disclosure of Anil Yadav from his residence which was used in the commission of offence. [P.W.61 para 23, pg. 684, Seizure memo Ext. 40, Disclosure Memo Ext. 43]
(vii) The fact of following Ajit Sarkar's white ambassador car by four persons on two motorcycles out of which the names of Harish Choudhary, Amar Yadav and Anil Yadav figure out on bullet and Yamaha motorcycles finds corroboration from the evidence of P.w.15 & 16. They also support the stand of P.W.25 that two persons got down from the car of Ajit Sarkar near the market. As such their testimony cannot be brushed aside merely on the account of they being chance witnesses. They do support the prosecution case that the car of Ajit Sarkar was being followed by the above mentioned persons on the day and time of incident.
(viii) Another admitted circumstance is that the cause of death of the deceased persons being firearm injuries fired from close range in the car on account of firing of bullets. [ Medical Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 207 evidence thus supportive of prosecution case]
(ix) The scientific Evidence with regard to the three empty cartridges seized from the scene of occurrence by P.W.56 on the same day is very much clear that the said three fired bullets could have been fired from AK 47 only. In this regard the statement of P.W. 28 (Senior Scientific Officer, Head of CFSL) assumes significance. (See Exhibit 9 series and 10)
(x) On inspection of the damaged car by Principal Scientific Officer CFSL (P.W. 33), two steel core portions were recovered from the car (Seizure memo Ext. 10) Report regarding steel core portion (Ext. 9/2) - Came from disintegration of two 7.62 mm assault rifle fired bullets.
(xi) The examination report of car Ext. 9/1 showing holes found in car by passage bullets fired from 7.62 mm assault rifle.
(xii) It is also important to mention here that mere non-
recovery of the said AK 47 is not fatal to the case of prosecution. Admittedly, the CBI came in picture after 4 months of the incident as such it was not probable for it to recover the said weapon.

(xiii) On the basis of disclosure by Rajan Tiwary, the Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 208 premises of Pappu Yadav was searched and one photograph of Pappu Yadav with his wife and Rajan Tiwary was recovered ( Mat. Ext. VII) and seized - seizure list Ext.39. This will show that both the appellants were very well known to each other from before. However, surprisingly the defence has taken a bald plea of morphing of the photograph but has not controverted the same in as much as the recovery from the residence of Pappu Yadav is not doubted. As such their first denial at the stage of statement under section 313 Cr.P.C. is only an after thought which does not deserve any consideration. It may be pertinent to mention here that the record of this case leaves no manner of doubt that the accused in this case, particularly A1 have been filing petitions, and upto the Apex Court, at the drop of a hat. If what is now being argued about the videoconferencing getting disconnected is true, then it can not be believed that A1 would have left it that and not taken it up to the highest court, if he had actually been prejudiced by such a thing.

(xiv) In this connection it is also relevant to point out that the reliance by the defence on the case of Machander Vs. State of Hyderabad (AIR 1955 SC 792) is totally misconceived and unfounded as this judgment nowhere postulates the actual Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 209 production of the material Ext. before the accused while his 313 Cr.P.C. statement is being recorded. In the said case the circumstance of confession itself was not put to the accused. In this regard reference is drawn to the case of A.A. Pareira Vrs. State of Maharashtra (2012) Vol. 1 PLJR 290 (SC) which lays down the test of prejudice and also states that failure in not drawing the attention of the accused would not by itself render the trial against the accused void and bad in law as the procedures contained in Cr.P.C. is designed to further the ends of justice and not to frustrate them by introducing hyper technicalities.

(xv) P.W.59 (Magistrate recording the confession of Rajan Tiwary) did not have any axe to grind against any of the appellants much less Rajan Tiwari and he will not have any reasons to falsely implicate him or the appellants. It is also to be seen that the evidence of disinterested witness like that of a Magistrate cannot be doubted or brushed aside. Daya Singh versus State of Haryana (2001) 3 SCC 468.

C. Test Identification Parade

168. The identification of accused Rajan Tiwary by P.Ws. 8, 9 and 10 in the TIP at Beur Jail despite the atmosphere of hostility lends further assurance to the correctness of the Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 210 prosecution case with regard to complicity of Rajan Tiwary. In this connection, reference is made to Exts. 5, 6 and 7 and deposition of P.Ws. 13 and 17 In this connection, it would be apt to point out that the three witnesses have been cross-examined at length on the point that the CBI had shown the photograph to them before TIP or they had seen them earlier in newspaper etc has been categorically denied. It has also been denied that the CBI had shown the appellant Rajan Tiwari to them has also been denied.

It will also be relevant to point out that P.W.8 K.C. Sarkar has categorically stated in his evidence that he remembered the face of Rajan Tiwari from the beginning. [Para 3 page 40] In this regard reference may be made to the decision of the Apex Court in which it has been held that mere publication of photographs in the newspaper is no ground to disbelieve the test identification parade and delay in holding TIP is snot fatal to the prosecution case. ( See Munna Vrs. State of A.P. (2012) 6 SCC 174 and Anil Kumar Vrs. State of U.P. ( 2003) AIR SCW 977) The witnesses have given specific description of Rajan Tiwari and that assumes importance since their statement was recorded before CBI in October 1998 while the TIP took place in May 1999 and Rajan Tiwari fitted in the description given by the Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 211 eye-witnesses before CBI. { See Daya Singh versus State of Haryana (2001) 3 SCC 468} The investigation conducted by local I.O. i.e. P.W. 56 A.K. Jha

169. The investigation conducted by local I.O., P.W. 56 is vitiated for the following reasons :-

a. Although as per P.W.56 he had recorded the fardbeyan of K.C. Sarkar at the residence of Ajit Sarkar at 5.45 p.m. but his statement is belied from his own deposition. He admits in his deposition that he had received the information of firing on telephone at about 5.00 p.m. and then he directly reached the P.O. He has stated that he reached the P.O. at 6.30 p.m. [ para 3, pg 431-32 read with para 6 pg. 439] b. P.W. 8 has categorically stated that he had not made any statement before the police and only is signature were taken on 15.06.98. This is important in light of the fact that Exhibit 31 which is the FIR of local police clearly shows that it was sent to the court of CJM, Purnia on 16.06.98 by a special messenger. As such it is hard to believe that if the statement was recorded on 14.06.98 then there was no reason for the FIR to be sent on 16.06.1998. Rather it lends support to the case of P.W. 8 to 10 that only the signatures of P.W.8 and 10 were taken on 15.06.98.
c. Further this has also to be seen in light of the inquest Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 212 report which is said to have been made between 6.00 to 6.30 p.m. In this regard the statement of P.W. 21 ( para 147) assumes importance who has deposed that he did not go to the place of incident and his signature was taken by the local police at his tea shop.

d. P.W.56 has accepted in his statement that he had taken warrant of arrest against Anil Yadav, Amar Yadav, Sanjay Rai and one Pawan Yadav on 27.06.98 only but for the reasons best known to him he has not done anything against them specially Amar and Anil throughout the period he was investigating which is almost 3 months till he submitted his charge sheet.

e. The names of 11 persons including the present appellants had transpired in the 164 Cr.P.C. statement of Sanjay Rai as early as on 12.08.98 but again for the reasons best known to him he has not done anything against them till he had submitted the charge sheet - a fact which has been admitted by this witness in his deposition ( Para 31 pg 454).

f. P.W. 56 had carried on the investigation for a period of 101 days but he had maintained diary only for 18 days - a conduct which is unbecoming of a police officer who is investigating a case of the murder of sitting MLA.

g. Although the State notification for transferring the case to CBI had come on 11.08.98 but knowing this fact he had submitted Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 213 the chargesheet on 20.09.98 and soon thereafter the notification of Central Government had also come on 29.09.98. As such it also clouds the conduct of said witness.

Effect of Evidence of P.W. 25 and P.W.19

170. According to learned counsel for P.W. 9 evidence of P.W. 25 and 19 should not be relied upon for the following reasons :-

1. The evidence of P.W.25 has to stand the test of scrutiny in as much as it does not inspire confidence when read as whole. This is so because the conduct of this witness, who is a bodyguard of the deceased Ajit Sarkar, cannot be ignored.
He being a security officer, remained ducked inside the vehicle for a long time, much after the incident was over. He has admitted that there was a huge crowd immediately after the incident. This should be read in harmony with the evidence of other witnesses as well. As such it was not easily possible to identify each and every person coupled with the fact that he had sustained gunshot injuries and was in a state of shock.

2. That the same test of reliability should be applied to P.w.19 as well. The appellants seek to take advantage the statement of this witness in his cross examination wherein he has stated that K.C. Sarkar came after 45 minutes and was Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 214 shouting as to who had killed. This has to be looked at after reading the testimonies of all the witnesses as a whole. The P.W. 8 is consistent in his stand that he did not know Rajan Tiwari from beginning. Further, even as per prosecution witnesses, who were at the scene of occurrence on the day of the incident, there was a huge crowd at the place of the incident. So taking this further and then reading it with the abovementioned statement of P.W.19 on which the appellants seek to rely, it can be safely concluded that only when P.W.8 had shouted that P.W.19 noticed him in the crowd and since P.W.8 was not knowing assailants by name, this explains the utterance of P.W.8 as to who had killed his brother.

Evidence of Eye witnesses

171. Evidence of eye witnesses P.Ws. 8 to 10 should be relied upon for the following reasons :-

1. P.W. 8, 9 & 10 read together are consistent before CBI as also during trial of being at the house of Ajit Sarkar for valid reasons.
2. Consistent statement of leaving from the house of Ajit Sarkar together carrying their cycles.
3. Their explanation of leaving the house of Ajit Sarkar on Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 215 account of bad weather gains strength from the evidence of P.W. 8, 9, 10 and 21
4. Consistent statement with regard to having witnessed the occurrence from a distance of 100 to 150 yards.
5. Consistency in the manner of assault.
6. Consistent on the point of not having given any statement to local police on account of fear and threat to life.
7. All the three witnesses are consistent in their identification of Rajan Tiwary at TIP as well as in court. Anil Yadav has also been identified by P.W.9 & 10 in dock.
8. The assault on P.W.8 during TIP lends support to the fact that the accused had apprehension of being identified and had therefore made preparation for frustrating the TIP and intimidating the witnesses. P.W.9 & 10 also met with bad treatment upon identifying the accused.
9. All the three witnesses stood the test of lengthy cross examination on the point of photograph of Rajan Tiwary not having been shown to them or seen by them prior to TIP.
10. P.W. 8 being the full brother of deceased Ajit Sarkar would not make an effort to screen the real culprit and allow them to escape conviction.
11. There is no reason on part of these witnesses to falsely Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 216 implicate the appellants as they had no personal animosity with them. Moreso when Rajan Tiwary was an outsider whom they did not know by name on the date of incident.
12. There is no plausible cause as to why they would risk their lives to only play into the hands of the CBI or any other political party. ( Atleast P.W.8 and 10 are simple villagers with no concern with politics.)
13. The credibility of these witnesses cannot be impeached because of minor contradictions and inconsistencies. Wholistic view to be taken while appreciating the evidence of witnesses.
The reasons for the silence of the witnesses has to be seen in light of the following facts:

172. According to learned counsel for P.W. 9 the silence of P.Ws. 8 to 10 for six months is to be seen in the following backgrounds :-

1. Murder of powerful politician (Sitting MLA) in broad day light by use of sophisticated weapons like AK47.
2. The assailants ( Known by face or name) were seen in company of Pappu Yadav, powerful and influential politician with criminal record.
3. Gross killing of three persons, one of them being Ajit Sarkar with security, at a busy road is sufficient to instill fear in the Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 217 minds of people with no power and influence.
4. The apprehension of threat to life was not unfounded in view of the fact that but for related, associated and official / formal witnesses, more than 20 witnesses have turned hostile and have resiled from their statement before CBI and even wife of slain MLA, the other brothers and daughter of the deceased Ajit Sarkar have not come to depose.
5. The treatment meted out to the witnessed during TIP further corroborate the threat & terror factor. The first TIP was carried out on 01/05/99 by P.W.17 (Ext.7) in which all three i.e. P.W.8 to 10 were present. However, due to unruly behavior of the inmates of the jail the process of identification could not be completed. In this regard, the report of the Magistrate(P.W.17) which has been marked as Exhibit 7 assumes great importance.
It will be sufficient to show that the extent to which the appellant Rajan Tiwari tried to intimidate the witness. No fingers can be pointed out at the said TIP after it has been read as a whole. The second TIP conducted on 13/5/99. P.W.9 & 10 identify Rajan Tiwary but both are SLAPPED. This also points out that the appellant was still not ready to budge down and he had again sent a message to the witnesses that they should not stand in his way. (Ext.5 & 6) Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 218

6. Witnesses had apprehension of undue influence being exercised over the local police and were thus not confident of fair and impartial investigation coupled with apprehension of security threats to them, could only muster courage by the advent of independent investigating agency of CBI. The murmuring of the investigation of the case being handed over to CBI had already started which crystallized in the shape of state government notification dated 11.08.1998 i.e. less than two months of the date of occurrence.

7. In this light the judgment of Krishna Mochi and others Vs. State of Bihar (2002) 6 SCC 81 assumes importance wherein the Apex Court has referred to the sharp decline in ethical values in public life and have stressed on the fact of the witnesses not being inclined to depose for manifold reasons being not having courage on account of threat to life etc. Morseso when offenders are habitual criminals, highups and musclemen. It has further been observed in the said case that the maxim - let 100 guilty be acquitted but not a single innocent be convicted is now changing as society not only suffers by wrong conviction but it equally suffers by wrong acquittal.

8. The case of Dayal Singh and others versus State of Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 219 Uttaranchal (2012) 8 SCC 263 also needs a reference wherein the I.O. and the doctor had both failed to perform their duties. The duty of the court in cases of such lapses is to see if evidence given in court should be relied upon and acquittal on grounds of defective investigation would amount to playing in the hands of I.O., if designedly defective. In criminal cases, fate of proceedings cannot be left in the hands of parties as crime is a public wrong.

9. It is humbly submitted that courts cannot shut their eyes to ground realities and this is one such case that owing to the reign of terror prevailing in Purnea, the witnesses could not have dared to approach any authority against the accused persons but no sooner did the CBI take up investigation, they faithfully got their statements recorded. The argument that if the witnesses did not trust the state police, they ought to have filed complaints before the court is not valid because even if the witnesses or the informant had filed a complaint, they would never have the sufficient wherewithal to obtain sufficient evidence against the might of the accused. In a private complaint, it is the complainant who has to adduce evidence and if the accused of this case could try to till them in course of a TIP, it can well be imagined how they would have secured Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 220 any evidence. Further, when more than one third of the PW's turned hostile even when the investigating agency was the CBI, it can well be imagined how many witnesses the poor complainant would have managed to bring to the court, in a private complaint.

Investigation by CBI- further investigation

173. According to learned counsel for P.W. 9 investigation by the C.B.I. is further investigation, which would be evident from the following facts :-

1. What is being contended by the accused is that since the Magistrate at Purnea had taken cognizance of offences, the CBI should have continued the proceedings before that court and the accused of the first chargesheet could not have been discharged by the CBI Magistrate and the trial of both sets of accused should have been amalgamated. It is being argued that the CBI investigation as also the proceedings before the Special Magistrate and the Special Judge CBI are vitiated on account of these. In this regard, a reference to Section 465 of the Cr.P.C.
may be relevant:

―465. Finding or sentence when reversible by reason of error, omission or irregularity.--(1) Subject to the provisions hereinbefore contained, no finding, sentence or order passed by Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 221 a court of competent jurisdiction shall be reversed or altered by a court of appeal, confirmation or revision on account of any error, omission or irregularity in the complaint, summons, warrant, proclamation, order, judgment or other proceedings before or during trial or in any inquiry or other proceedings under this Code, or any error, or irregularity in any sanction for the prosecution, unless in the opinion of that court, a failure of justice has in fact been occasioned thereby.
(2) In determining whether any error, omission or irregularity in any proceeding under this Code, or any error, or irregularity in any sanction for the prosecution has occasioned a failure of justice, the court shall have regard to the fact whether the objection could and should have been raised at an earlier stage in the proceedings.‖
2. In light of the aforesaid provision, it is submitted that all grounds being raised by the appellants accused at this appellate stage are of no consequence and are fit to be rejected in view of the clear statutory intendment.
3. In fact in a recent judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court reported in (2012) 4 SCC 566 it has been held " 37. On a studied scrutiny of the anatomy of the said provision, it is luculent that the emphasis has been laid on a Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 222 ―court of competent jurisdiction‖ and ―error, omission or irregularity in the complaint, summons, warrant, proclamation, order, judgment or other proceedings before or during trial‖ and ―a failure of justice has in fact been occasioned thereby‖. The legislative intendment inhered in the language employed is graphically clear that lancination or invalidation of a verdict after trial is not to be taken recourse to solely because there is an error, omission or irregularity in the proceeding. The term ―a failure of justice‖ has been treated as the sine qua non for setting aside the conviction.
And further held:

62. We have referred to the aforesaid authorities to illumine and elucidate that the delay in conclusion of trial has a direct nexus with the collective cry of the society and the anguish and agony of an accused (quaere a victim). Decidedly, there has to be a fair trial and no miscarriage of justice and under no circumstances, prejudice should be caused to the accused but, a pregnant one, every procedural lapse or every interdict that has been acceded to and not objected at the appropriate stage would not get the trial dented or make it unfair. Treating it to be unfair would amount to an undesirable state of pink of perfection in procedure. An absolute apple-pie order in carrying out the Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 223 adjective law, would only be sound and fury signify nothing.
63. In the case at hand, as is perceivable, no objection was raised at the time of framing of charge or any other relevant time but only propounded after conviction. Under these circumstances, the right of the collective as well as the right of the victim springs to the forefront and then it becomes obligatory on the part of the accused to satisfy the court that there has been failure of justice or prejudice has been caused to him. Unless the same is established, setting aside of conviction as a natural corollary or direction for retiral as the third step of the syllogism solely on the said foundation would be an anathema to justice.‖
4. It has been observed by even the Apex Court that the accused in this case delayed the trial by adopting every trick in the book and filing petitions at the drop of the hat. Therefore it is very difficult to believe that had the accused actually been prejudiced by any order passed by the trial court, they would not have challenged the order.
5. With reference to the judgment of the Apex Court in Vinay Tyagi's case (delivered on 13.12.2012) it is submitted that it is an admitted position that this was a case of further investigation and not re-investigation. Insofar as the present set of accused Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 224 are concerned, they were duly chargesheeted and have been tried in accordance with law on the basis of evidence adduced by CBI against them. Therefore no prejudice has been caused to them on account of the fact that the accused of the chargesheet submitted by the state police have not been tried. Even insofar as this chargesheet is concerned, the accused of this chargesheet have been discharged by the CBI Magistrate in light of the evidence collected by the CBI. Moreover, the entire records of the Purnea proceedings were eventually transferred to the CBI court and it was only thereafter that the trial has been concluded. Therefore no prejudice whatsoever has been caused to the present accused on this account. Further more the fact situation in Vinay Tyagi's case was also very different as that was a case of discharge while in the present case the trial has been concluded.
5. It is further pertinent to mention here that these grounds were raised by the defence before the trial court as well but rejected in para 48 of the trial court judgment by holding that being the trial court, its duty was to determine who the culprits were, who had committed the murder and it would not go into the legality and propriety of the discharge order. This view is absolutely correct as the trial court has to decide on the guilt of the Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 225 accused on the basis of the evidence adduced and such technical objections could not and cannot be permitted to come in the way of doing substantive justice.
6. It is being further sought to be argued by the A1 that although the P.W. 61 took over the investigation of the case only on 23.10.1998 but on the same day he sent requests to obtain details regarding the election and criminal antecedents of A1. Motive is therefore being attributed that the CBI wanted to implicate A1 from the very beginning. It is pertinent to mention here that true it is that the state police did hardly any investigation and therefore there might or might not have been any material against A1 thus far but this would not imply that the CBI should also be equally lax in its investigations. A1 was admittedly an accused when the CBI took over and if the PW 61 tried to obtain details of A1, immediately after starting investigation, no fault could be found with it.
174. Therefore, in consideration of entire facts and circumstances of the case as well as the time when the crime was perpetrated when the terror of appellants was writ large especially in reference with Purnea, small inconsistencies in the evidence / case of the prosecution cannot be made a big issue. The Court has to consider the ground realities prevalent in the State of Bihar at that time. The Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 226 investigation by the local police was not above board in a high profile case such as the present one. As such in consideration of the evidence of prosecution witnesses, coupled with the confession of accused Rajan Tiwary, the test identification parade, the conduct of the accused persons during and after the incident and the exhibits on record, no flaw can be attributed to the case of prosecution and the conviction of accused persons deserves to be sustained.

Findings :

175. Having noted the prosecution case, evidence adduced together with arguments of the counsel for the parties, this Court proceed to consider the correctness or otherwise of the impugned judgment holding the appellants guilty of hatching conspiracy to eliminate Ajit Sarkar, which was executed by the appellants and two others on 14.6.1998 and to undergo rigorous imprisonment for life. Prosecution case of K. Hat P.S. Case No. 230/98 dated 14.6.1998 is set out in the fardbeyan of Kalyan Chandra Sarkar, P.W. 8, Ext. 27 recorded by Sri A.K. Jha, P.W. 56 Circle Inspector, Sadar Purnea at the residence of the deceased Ajit Sarkar on 14.6.1998 at 17.45 hours. The informant had come to the house of his brother Ajit Sarkar on 14.6.1998 in the morning between 7-8 hours. The informant along with two comrades of his brother Madhusudan Rishi, P.W. 9 and Lal Bahadur Oraon, P.W. 10 was returning to his village Rani Patra on the same day at about 4.30 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 227 P.M. The informant and two comrades had come ahead of Kali Flour Mill, they saw a motorcycle parked on the road and two persons (1) Jawahar Yadav and (2) Abdul Sattar were standing near the motorcycle. Abdul Sattar signalled the car of his brother Ajit Sarkar coming from opposite direction to stop. No sooner the car stopped (3) Diwakar Chaudhary (4) Pappu Dev came on motorcycle from the front (5) Bipin Singh and 6-7 others variously armed also came in a car and resorted to indiscriminate firing. The two persons who were first seen standing near the motorcycle also fired from rifle. Informant, P.W. 8 and the two comrades, P.Ws. 9 and 10 raised alarm but the assailants managed to escape. Informant and the two comrades came near the car and saw his brother Ajit Sarkar, Asfaq Alam of Mahmadia Estate and driver Hirendra Sharma dead, Bodyguard Ramesh Oraon, P.W. 25 seriously injured. The fardbeyan was scribed by Inspector A.K. Jha, P.W. 56 and signed by informant, P.W. 8, Lal Bahadur Oraon, P.W. 10 and Bilin Chandra Sarkar another brother of the deceased Ajit Sarkar. Having scribed the fardbeyan Inspector A.K. Jha, P.W. 56 under instruction from S.P., Purnea took up the investigation, inspected the place of occurrence, seized three empty cartridges of A.K. 47 vide seizure list, Ext. 26. The inquest report of the three dead bodies was also prepared by A.K. Jha, P.W. 56 vide Exts. Y, Y/1 and Y/2. Injured Bodyguard Ramesh Oraon, P.W. 25 was shifted to the hospital and examined by Dr. Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 228 R.D. Raman, P.W. 15 vide injury report, Ext. 24. In the night between 14-15.6.1998 further statement of the informant, P.W. 8 and the statement of two comrades Madhusudan Rishi and Lal Bahadur Oraon, P.Ws. 9 and 10 was recorded reiterating the contents of the fardbeyan, Ext. 27. In the same night raid was conducted in the house of the accused named in the fardbeyan but none was found at their residence. Post mortem of the three dead bodies was, however, delayed until the arrival of Sri Lalu Prasad Yadav as there was public outcry after the incident and was conducted on 15.6.1998 by Dr. B.K. Sinha, P.W. 32 vide Exts. 13, 13/1, 13/2. Kalyan Chandra Sarkar, P.W. 8 furnished the alias name of Bipin Singh accused no. 5 of K. Hat P.S. Case No. 230/98 on 22.6.1998 to the I.O. of the said case, P.W. 56 along with his address, whereafter Bipin Singh @ Bipin Chaudhary was arrested and remanded to judicial custody on 23.6.1998. Smt. Madhvi Bose (Sarkar) wife of the deceased Ajit Sarkar made a written request to Hon'ble the Chief Minister, Bihar on 1.7.1998 to transfer the investigation of K. Hat P.S. Case No. 230/98 to C.B.I. On 19.7.1998 Smt. Madhvi Sarkar filed application under Section 452 Cr.P.C. before Chief Judicial Magistrate, Purnea requesting for release of the Ambassador Car, which was allowed under order dated 25.7.1998 and the car was handed over to Smt. Madhvi Sarkar. While the investigation of K. Hat P.S. Case No. 230/98 continued the State Government issued notification dated Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 229 11.8.1998 under Section 6 of the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946, Ext. 3 granting its consent for investigation of K. Hat P.S. Case No. 230/98 by the C.B.I. Before consideration of the consent given by the State Government under notification dated 11.8.1998 and issue of notification by the Government of India entrusting investigation of K. Hat P.S. Case No. 230/98 to the C.B.I. Purnea district police recorded on 12.8.1998 the statement of one Sanjay Rai under Section 164 Cr.P.C. and as Sanjay Rai corroborated the contents of the fardbeyan including further statement of the informant, P.W. 8 and the statement of the two comrades, P.Ws. 9 and 10 submitted charge sheet no. 210 dated 20.9.1998 in the court of Chief Judicial Magistrate, Purna finding the accusation true against accused no. 5 Bipin Singh @ Bipin Chaudhary the arrested accused and four others i.e. Jawahar Yadav, Abdul Sattar, Diwakar Chaudhary and Pappu Dev named in the fardbeyan showing them as absconders. From perusal of the charge sheet submitted by Purnea police, it is apparent that the investigation continued against the other suspects named by Sanjay Rai in his statement recorded under Section 164 Cr.P.C. including the three appellants herein. Chief Judicial Magistrate, Purnea under order dated 23.9.1998 having perused the charge sheet dated 20.9.1998 took cognizance of the offences found true by Purnea police and summoned the accused sent up for trial i.e. Bipin Singh, four absconders and kept pending the supplementary Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 230 investigation against the 11 persons, the three appellants (4) Harish Chaudhary (5) Amar Yadav (6) Prabhat Yadav (7) Pawan Yadav (8) Pankaj Yadav (9) Santosh Yadav (10) Raju Yadav and (11) Manoj Yadav. Government of India issued notification dated 28.9.1998, Ext. 42 entrusting investigation of K. Hat P.S. Case No. 230/98 to the C.B.I. C.B.I. having taken over the investigation of K. Hat P.S. Case No. 230/98 on 12.10.1998 for administrative convenience registered first information no. RC 12(S)/98-SIC-IV/New Delhi, Ext. 37/1 incorporating the contents of the fardbeyan of K. Hat P.S. Case No. 230/98. After registration of RC 12 (S)/ 98-SIC-IV/ New Delhi investigation of the said case was entrusted to Sri N. S. Kharayat, Dy. S.P. C.B.I, P.W. 61 and Inspector M.L. Meena, P.W. 57. The investigating team reached Purnea on 21/22.10.1998 for conducting further investigation and called upon the District Magistrate, Superintendent of Police, Purnea as also the I.O. of K. Hat P.S. Case No. 230/98, P.W. 56 with a request to P.W. 56 to hand over the case records, which was duly handed over by P.W. 56 to P.W. 61 on 23.10.1998. Having perused the investigation records of K. Hat P.S. Case No. 230/98 P.W. 61 recorded the statement of Ravindra Nath Singh, Kalyan Chandra Sarkar, Madhusudan Rishi and Lal Bahadur Oraon, P.Ws. 7, 8, 9 and 10 on 25.10.1998, 24.10.1998, 29.10.1998 and 28.10.1998 respectively. In the statement recorded by the I.O. of C.B.I., P.W. 61, Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 231 P.W. 8 disowned his statement recorded on 14.6.1998 at 5.45 P.M. on the basis of which fardebyan, Ext. 27 was recorded by A.K. Jha, P.W.

56. He also disowned his re-statement made under Section 161 Cr.P.C. before A.K. Jha during the night between 14-15.6.1998. In the statement made before the I.O. of C.B.I P.W. 8 claimed that while he reached ahead of Kali Flour Mill near culvert along with P.Ws. 9 and 10 he saw Ajit Sarkar coming in his white Ambassador Car from a distance of 100- 150 yards. He further claimed that a red bullet motorcycle with two occupants intercepted the car followed by another black Yamaha motorcycle also with two occupants stopped on the right side of the car. The pillion rider of the red bullet motorcycle shot at the driver of the car. The driver of red bullet motorcycle kept the motorcycle in start position. The pillion rider of black Yamaha motorcycle resorted to indiscriminate firing on the person of Ajit Sarkar with a weapon which looked like A.K. 47. The accused driving Yamaha motorcycle was firing shots from a small weapon. According to P.W. 8 accused persons riding the two motorcycles killed the driver of the car Hirendra Sharma, Ajit Sarkar and Asfaq Alam sitting on the rear seat of the car and injured Ramesh Oran Bodyguard, P.W. 25 sitting on the front next to the driver. According to P.W. 8 after the occurrence many people gathered at the place of occurrence. The dead bodies and the injured were taken to hospital in Ambulance. The dead body of Ajit Sarkar was brought to his Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 232 residence in the night of 14.6.1998. He further claimed before the I.O. C.B.I. that local police arrived next day on 15.6.1998 between 10-11 A.M. to enquire from him about the incident. P.W. 8 claimed before the I.O. C.B.I. that he did not make any statement before the local police but had given the local police at their request blank paper with his signature to the police officer who had come to take his statement indicating 14.6.1998 as the date beneath his signature on the blank paper. P.Ws. 9 and 10 stated before the I.O. C.B.I. that they had come to the residence of Ajit Sarkar on 14.6.1998 at about 4 P.M. as Sri Sarkar had called them for providing hand pump but they could not meet Sri Sarkar. P.W. 8 informed P.Ws. 9, 10 that Sri Sarkar has gone to village Tharhara for panchayati then the three decided to return to their village Rani Patra. While returning P.Ws. 8 to 10 having come ahead of Kali Flour Mill near culvert saw white Ambassador car of the deceased Ajit Sarkar followed by red bullet motorcycle driven by appellant Anil Yadav and Harish Chaudhary sitting as pillion rider. They also saw a black Yamaha motorcycle driven by Amar Yadav over which Rajan Tiwary was the pillion rider. The black Yamaha motorcycle stopped on the right side of the car of the deceased Ajit Sarkar. Anil Yadav kept the red bullet motorcycle in start position. The other three i.e. the driver of black Yamaha motorcycle and the pillion riders of red bullet and Yamaha motorcycle resorted to indiscriminate firing killing Hirendra Sharma the Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 233 driver of the car, Ajit Sarkar and Asfaq Alam sitting on the rear seat of the car and also inflicted grievous injury on the person of the Bodyguard Ramesh Oraon, P.W. 25 sitting in the front next to the driver. It would appear from the statement of P.Ws. 8 to 10 made before the I.O. C.B.I. that they gave a consistent description of an unknown assailant who was later identified as Rajan Tiwary upon arrest and consequent disclosure made by him in Delhi and Purnea. Having recorded the statement of the eye witnesses investigators of C.B.I. conducted further investigation and obtained report dated 23.12.1998, Ext. 9 with regard to three fired cartridges recovered from the spot by P.W. 56. From perusal of report, it appears that the shots were fired from single 7.62 MM assault rifle. Investigators of C.B.I. under letter dated 5.1.1999 obtained information from the General Manager (Vigilance) M.T.N.L., New Delhi about the name of the subscriber of telephone nos. 3730767 and 3736358 including the print out of the calls made and received by those numbers during the period between 14.4.1998-31.12.1998. Call details of the aforesaid two telephone numbers was submitted by P.W. 12 on 15.1.1999 vide Exts. 3/4, 3/5. Delhi police arrested Rajan Tiwary on 12.2.1999 in connection with R.K. Puram P.S. Case No. 122/99 registered for the offence under Section 25 of the Arms Act. After arrest Rajan Tiwary made disclosure pertaining to K. Hat P.S. Case No. 230/98. Rajan Tiwary was produced on 13.2.1999 in the court of Sri Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 234 K.S. Mohi, Metropolitan Magistrate, Patiala House in connection with R.K. Puram P.S. Case No. 122/99 vide remand application dated 13.2.1999, Ext. F/4 on the basis of which he was remanded to judicial custody until 26.2.1999. P.W. 61 obtained custody of Rajan Tiwary on 13.2.1999 from S.I. Palvinder Singh for a period of 10 days until 23.2.1999 as would appear from the following endorsement ―received accused in muffled condition with warrant‖ made by P.W. 61 in the margin of petition dated 13.2.1999, Ext. F filed by S.I. Palvinder Singh on the basis of which Metropolitan Magistrate remanded the accused Rajan Tiwary to judicial custody till 26.2.1999. During the period between 13-23.2.1999 Rajan Tiwary was subjected to sustained interrogation by moving him from Delhi to Purnea and back. During the period of sustained interrogation search warrant was also obtained on 17.2.1999 to search the house of the appellants. From Delhi house of appellant Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav one photograph, material Ext.VII was seized vide seizure memo, Ext. 39 in which appellant Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav, his wife and child are seen with appellant Rajan Tiwary. Appellant Anil Yadav was called to C.B.I. Camp Office at Purnea on 17.2.1999, arrested and produced before the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Purnea on 18.2.1999 who remanded him to C.B.I. custody for ten days under order dated 18.2.1999 passed in K. Hat P.S. Case No. 230/98. Anil Yadav also made disclosures on the basis of Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 235 which red bullet motorcycle was recovered from his house. He was again produced before the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Purnea on 28.2.1999 in K. Hat P.S. Case No. 230/98 as suspect. Call details of Katihar P.C.O. booth no. 34679 was obtained under memo dated 18.2.1999, Ext. 3. Appellant Rajan Tiwary also made disclosures on 18/17.2.1999 leading to recoveries vide Exts. 1/8, 1/9, 1/10. Rajan Tiwary was produced before the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi on 22.2.1999 and a petition Ext. 41 was filed to examine Rajan Tiwary under Section 164 Cr.P.C. Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi endorsed the said petition to Sri G.S. Saini, Metropolitan Magistrate, P.W. 59. Appellant Rajan Tiwary with muffled face was thereafter produced by the I.O. C.B.I., P.W. 61 before Sri G.S. Saini at 12.30 P.M. for recording his 164 Cr.P.C. statement. Sri Saini after observing the safeguards provided under Sub-clause (2) of Section 164 proceeded to record the confessional statement of Rajan Tiwary at 1.15 P.M. Having recorded the confessional statement of Rajan Tiwary on 22.2.1999 Sri G.S. Saini, P.W. 59 gave his custody to I.O. C.B.I., P.W. 61, who again produced Rajan Tiwary before Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi on 23.2.1999 when he was remanded to judicial custody in Tihar Jail. After being lodged in Tihar on 23.2.1999 Rajan Tiwary filed undated application addressed to Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi informing the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi that he has been implicated in Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 236 a false case by the crime branch of Delhi police. Perusal of undated application further indicates that while Rajan Tiwary was in C.B.I. custody he was subjected to extensive beating, torture and other third degree methods as also forced to sign various blank papers, written document and false statements. He was also not allowed to meet any one including press person(s). Having come to jail custody he has learnt from others about his statement which the police got published in newspaper, which is wholly false. Aforesaid undated application of Rajan Tiwary was forwarded to Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi by the Deputy Superintendent, Central Jail No. 5, Tihar, New Delhi under letter no. 181 dated 1.3.1999. The validity of the safeguards observed by Sri G.S. Saini before recording the confessional statement of Rajan Tiwary including his conduct of handing over the custody of Rajan Tiwary to the I.O. of C.B.I., P.W. 61 after recording his 164 Cr.P.C. statement shall be examined in this judgment a little later. Black Yamaha motorcycle bearing Registration No. WB72-7109 was seized on 25.2.1999 from Jogbani P.S. vide Ext. 33/2 as the said motorcycle was recovered by Jogbani P.S. on 4.7.1998 in abandoned condition. Two steel core portions of A.K. 47 bullet were recovered under memo dated 3.3.1999, Ext. 10 from Ambassador car of the deceased parked in the garage of Nitu da. Rajan Tiwary was again produced before the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi on 9.3.1999 when Chief Metropolitan Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 237 Magistrate, Delhi directed the Superintendent, Central Jail, Tihar to arrange for transfer of Rajan Tiwary to concerned jail for his appearance before the Special Judicial Magistrate, C.B.I. Patna on or before 23.3.1999. Rajan Tiwary was transferred to Adarsh Central Jail, Beur, Patna and produced before the Special Judicial Magistrate, C.B.I. Patna on 22.3.1999 and remanded to judicial custody. The two steel core portions recovered from the car of the deceased on 3.3.1999 were subjected to examination. Sri Rup Singh, P.W. 33 under report dated 22.3.1999, Ext. 9/1 reported that the aforesaid two steel core portions were fired from 7.62 MM assault rifle. Call records of telephone nos. 23150, 23929 and 23446 installed at Purnea residence of Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav was received by the C.B.I. on 26.3.1999 under the signature of S.Z. Hassan, P.W. 11. Rup Singh Scientific Officer, P.W. 33 under report no. 171 dated 1.4.1999, Ext. 9/2 reported that multiple holes found in the Ambassador car of the deceased was caused by passage of 7.62 MM bullet. Rajan Tiwary was subjected to Test Identification Parade in Adarsh Central Jail, Beur, Patna on 1.5.1999 conducted by Sri Dharmsheel Srivastava, Judicial Magistrate, Ist Class, P.W. 17. In the said Test Identification Parade P.W. 8 identified the suspect Rajan Tiwary in 5th attempt, as would appear from the memorandum dated 3.5.1999, Ext. 7 prepared by the T.I. Magistrate, P.W. 17. I.O. C.B.I., P.W. 61 relying on the statement of the eye Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 238 witnesses as also the other witnesses including identification made by P.W. 8 submitted charge sheet no. 01 dated 10.5.1999 before the Special Magistrate, C.B.I., Patna finding the accusation made against accused persons named in column nos. 1 and 2 of the report dated 10.5.1999 to be true. In paragraph 13 of the report dated 10.5.1999 it is further observed that local police had filed charge sheet no. 210/98 dated 19.9.1998 (mistake for 20.9.1998) in the court of Chief Judicial Magistrate, Purnea against accused Bipin Singh @ Bipin Chaudhary and four others, namely, Jawahar Yadav, Abdul Sattar, Diwakar Chaudhary and Pappu Dev of Saharsa with intimation to the court that investigation against others including the appellants herein is in progress but the accused persons named in the charge sheet filed by the local police have not been found involved in the commission of this crime. It is further stated in the report dated 10.5.1999 that the record concerning the charge sheet submitted by the local police before Chief Judicial Magistrate, Purnea may be summoned and the accused persons named in the charge sheet submitted by the local police be discharged from the case. Another T.I.P. was arranged on 12.5.1999 which was conducted by Sri Ravindra Patwari, Judicial Magistrate, Ist Class, P.W. 13 in which P.Ws. 9 and 10 identified Rajan Tiwary vide T.I. Chart, Ext. 6. Appellant Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav was arrested on 23.5.1999. C.B.I. Magistrate in the light of the charge sheet dated 10.5.1999 took cognizance of the offence Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 239 under order dated 16.7.1999 and summoned the accused sent up for trial by the C.B.I. Supplementary charge sheet no. 04 dated 19.8.1999 was submitted in continuation of the earlier charge sheet dated 10.5.1999 showing accused Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav in judicial custody and two others as absconders. Having filed charge sheet, supplementary charge sheet I.O. C.B.I., P.W. 61 also filed separate application dated 15.9.1999 before the Special Magistrate C.B.I., Patna for discharge of accused sent up for trial by the Purnea police under charge sheet no. 210 dated 20.9.1998. Special Magistrate C.B.I, Patna under order dated 15.9.1999 not only discharged the accused sent up for trial by the Purnea police under charge sheet dated 20.9.1998 but also committed the case of the three appellants sent up for trial by I.O. C.B.I. under charge sheet dated 10.5.1999 and supplementary charge sheet dated 19.8.1999. The validity of the order dated 15.9.1999 passed by the Special Magistrate C.B.I., Patna discharging the accused sent up for trial by the Bihar police shall also be examined a little later. Additional Sessions Judge-XI cum C.B.I. Court, Patna under order dated 19.8.2000 framed common charges separately against the appellants which has been indicated in paragraph 7 at page 21 above. In support of the prosecution case C.B.I. examined 61 witnesses including the three eye witnesses, P.Ws. 8 to 10 as indicated in paragraph 8 above. Besides the oral evidence C.B.I. also relied on the documentary evidence as also materials exhibits which has Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 240 also been indicated in paragraphs 9 and 10 above.


Ocular and documentary evidence :

176. Success of the prosecution case will depend upon the truthfulness or otherwise of the eye witnesses i.e. P.Ws. 8 to 10.
Aforesaid eye witnesses were first examined by the I.O. of local police A.K. Jha, P.W. 56 on 14.6.1998 and during the night between 14- 15.6.1998. Before P.W. 56 the eye witnesses are said to have implicated the accused persons named in the fardbeyan, Ext. 27, namely, Bipin Singh @ Bipin Chaudhary and four others i.e. Jawahar Yadav, Md. Sattar, Diwakar Chaudhary and Pappu Dev and sent up for trial under charge sheet no. 210/98 dated 20.9.1998 filed by the Purnea police in the court of Chief Judicial Magistrate, Purnea. These eye witnesses were examined by the I.O. C.B.I., P.W. 61 between 25 to 29.10.1998. In the statement recorded before P.W. 61 the eye witnesses disowned their earlier statement recorded on 14.6.1998 and during the night between 14-15.6.1998 by the I.O. of Purnea police, P.W. 56 and implicated these three appellants and the two absconders named in the charge sheet, supplementary charge sheet dated 10.5.1999, 19.8.1999 filed by the I.O. C.B.I., P.W. 61. P.W. 61 having noticed that the eye witnesses have completely changed the identity of the accused as given in the fardbeyan, Ext. 27 and the statement recorded by P.W. 56 during the Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 241 night between 14-15.6.1998 and the statement given before him, confronted the eye witnesses with their earlier statement made on 14.6.1998 and during the night between 14-15.6.1998. The eye witnesses, however, maintained before P.W. 61 that whatever they are saying before him they have already stated before K. Hat police. In the court the eye witnesses further changed their stand. P.W. 8 stated in paragraph 1 that he never recorded his fardbeyan as Purnea police arrived on 15.6.1998 between 10-11 A.M. to enquire from him about the occurrence. P.W. 8 refused to make any statement before the officer who had come to enquire from him about the occurrence but on the instruction of the officer gave the officer blank paper with his signature indicating 14.6.1998 as the date beneath his signature. P.W. 8 identified his signature over the fardbeyan, which was marked as Ext. 1/4. P.W. 8 further reiterated in paragraph 7 of his cross examination that he had not given any statement before the police as an eye witness of the occurrence either on 14.6.1998 or on 15.6.1998 but had only put his signature on 15.6.1998. In the same paragraph he has further stated that he had not shown the place of occurrence to the police officials. In paragraph 11, P.W. 8 stated that he had not shown the place from where he had seen the occurrence to any one. In the same paragraph P.W. 8 further stated that he had given the first statement to the C.B.I. The two witnesses who accompanied him at the time of occurrence also did not Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 242 record their statement before the local police. In the same paragraph he further stated that on the date of occurrence wife and son of the deceased Ajit Sarkar were available in the house but he did not inform them about the occurrence. P.W. 9 also in paragraph 5 of his cross-examination accepted that he had given his first statement before the C.B.I. after four months of the occurrence. In paragraph 6 of his cross examination P.W. 9 further accepted that until he made statement before the I.O. of C.B.I. he had not disclosed to any one, except his party workers that he is an eye witness of the occurrence. P.W. 10 in paragraph 6 of his cross examination also accepted that he had not disclosed any information about the occurrence to the local police. In paragraph 7 he further stated that he had not given any statement about the occurrence to the local police. Aforesaid stand of the three eye witnesses is contrary to the evidence of the I.O. of local police, P.W. 56 who has asserted in his evidence that P.W. 8 recorded the fardbeyan giving the manner of occurrence as also the name of the five accused persons i.e. Bipin Singh @ Bipin Chaudhary, Jawahar Yadav, Abdul Sattar, Diwakar Chaudhary and Pappu Dev incorporated in the fardbeyan. He further stated that P.W. 8 further reiterated the version recorded by him in the fardbeyan in his further statement which was recorded during the night between 14- 15.6.1998. He also stated that P.Ws. 9 and 10 in their statement under Section 161 Cr.P.C. recorded during the night between 14-15.6.1998 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 243 also reiterated the version of the occurrence given by P.W. 8 including the name of the accused mentioned in the fardbeyan and the further statement of P.W. 8. I.O. C.B.I., P.W. 61 having noticed the contradiction in the statement of the three eye witnesses given before him and the statement given before the I.O. Purnea police, P.W. 56 confronted P.Ws. 8 to 10 with their previous statement recorded before the I.O. of local police, P.W. 56. Eye witnesses, however, maintained that whatever they had stated before the I.O. C.B.I. they had already stated before the K.Hat police. In this regard reference is required to be made to the statement of the I.O. C.B.I., P.W. 61 in paragraph 237, 238 of his deposition, which is incorporated hereinbelow for ready reference :

237. Before recording the evidence of K.C. Sarkar, Madhusudan Rishi and Lal Bahadur Oraon, I tried and find out that the statement of those three witnesses recorded by K. Hat Police. I had gone through their earlier statement recorded by K. Hat police before recording their statement.
238. I confronted the witnesses at the time of recording their evidence from earlier evidence. They have stated that whatever they are saying before me, they have already stated before K. Hat Police.
It would, thus, appear that the three eye witnesses of the Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 244 occurrence are not only contradicting themselves about the identity of the assailants before the I.O. of local police P.W. 56 and the I.O. of C.B.I., P.W. 61 but are also contradicting themselves on the point of recording first statement. Before I.O. C.B.I. they stated that they recorded the same statement before the I.O. of local police which they have recorded before him. In court the eye witnesses i.e. P.Ws. 8 to 10 stated that they had not recorded fardbeyan, further statement and the statement before the I.O. of local police and made their first statement before the I.O. of C.B.I. P.W. 8 further stated in court that on 15.6.1998 between 10-11 A.M. police officer from K. Hat P.S. had approached him to enquire about the occurrence but he refused to make any statement, however, at the request of the police officer gave him blank paper with signature indicating 14.6.1998 as the date beneath the signature. Aforesaid two material contradictions in the deposition of the eye witnesses is required to be considered in the light of the evidence of I.O. of local police, P.W. 56. The evidence of P.W. 56 has not been challenged by the prosecution nor has any suggestion been made to him that he fabricated the fardbeyan and misconducted the investigation. On the contrary P.W. 8 having admitted his signature on the fardbeyan, the evidence of P.W. 56 is required to be accepted. P.W. 8 and the two comrades, P.Ws. 9 and 10 when confronted by the I.O. C.B.I., P.W. 61 admitted before him that they had given the same statement to the I.O. of Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 245 local police which they are giving before him. P.W. 8 never made complaint before any authority that his signature was taken by P.W. 56 on blank paper on 15.6.1998 with date 14.6.1998 beneath his signature. The contents of the fardbeyan are detailed and it is not possible to accept the criticism that the I.O. of local police, P.W. 56 imagined those details and prepared/fabricated Ext. 27. Reference in this connection is made to the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Sarwan Singh and Others Vs. State of Punjab, (1976) 4 SCC 369, paragraph 8 at page

375. Judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Kanti Kumari Roy Vs. Suresh Kumar Roy and others, AIR 1990 Supreme Court 1631, paragraph 6 and Khujji @ Surendra Tiwari Vs. State of Madhya Pradesh, (1991) 3 SCC 627, paragraph 6 has been relied upon by the counsel for the appellant to substantiate the submission that P.W. 8 being a retired Sergeant Driver of the Railway Protection Force cannot be believed that he handed over blank paper with his signature to the I.O. of local police, P.W. 56 and did not disclose such fact even to the I.O. of C.B.I., P.W. 61 till he came to the court to give evidence that he gave blank paper with his signature to the I.O. of State police, P.W. 56. P.W. 9 is also not to be relied as he is member of C.P.M. District Committee and did not disclose to the local police that he is an eye witness but disclosed such fact after four months of the occurrence to the C.B.I. He is also not to be relied as he knew Anil Yadav, Harish Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 246 Chaudhary, Amar Yadav by face and name prior to the occurrence but his failure to disclose their names to P.W. 8 renders his claim doubtful. He also stands extensively contradicted in the light of his case diary statement recorded by P.W. 56. P.W. 9 claimed that he informed his party worker about identity of the assailant but not a single party worker has been examined to corroborate him. On the contrary I.O. C.B.I., P.W. 61 stated that he could not locate any party worker to whom P.W. 9 had disclosed the name of the assailants. Aforesaid false evidence given by P.W. 9 shakes the foundation of the prosecution case. P.W. 9 is also not to be relied as he stands contradicted by injured P.W. 25 as according to P.W. 9 injured was sent to hospital in Ambulance, which is incorrect in view of the evidence of the injured that he went to the hospital in tempo. P.W. 9 having not disclosed to the local police soon after the incident that he is an eye witness no reliance can be placed on his evidence. Evidence of P.W. 10 is also not fit to be relied as he having counter- signed the fardbeyan, Ext. 27 on 14.6.1998 denied such fact. P.W. 10 also knew Anil Yadav, Amar Yadav and Harish Chaudhary from before but did not disclose their names to P.W. 8 vide paragraph 10 of the evidence of P.W. 8. He also did not disclose the names of the assailants to the wife of the deceased vide paragraph 10 of the evidence of P.W.

10. He also did not inform local police that he is an eye witness vide paragraphs 6, 7 of his evidence. He disclosed the fact that he is an eye Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 247 witness to the occurrence one month after the occurrence vide paragraph 2 of his evidence. In view of the aforesaid material contradictions in the statement and deposition of the eye witnesses, the submission of the counsel for the appellants that P.Ws. 8 to 10 cannot be relied as they are residents of village Rani Patra, which is seven kilometers away from the place of occurrence and reached the place of occurrence after 45 minutes of the occurrence as per the evidence of Ranu Kumar Singh, P.W. 19 paragraph 8 and injured Ramesh Oraon, P.W. 25 paragraphs 8 to 10 that he remained at the place of occurrence for about half an hour after the occurrence but the eye witnesses were not seen by him, is required to be appreciated. Injured P.W. 25 further stated in paragraph 2 that Subhash Singh was first to arrive at the place of occurrence and that Subhash Singh rescued him from the car. The evidence of P.Ws. 19, 25 contradicts the eye witnesses that they were the first to reach the place of occurrence. Sunil Kumar Singh, P.W. 14 has also corroborated the injured Ramesh Oraon about the presence of Subhash Singh and has stated that it was Subhash Singh who gave information at the house of the deceased Ajit Sarkar about incident at 5 P.M. The evidence of P.Ws. 19, 25, 14 having not been challenged by the prosecution their evidence is binding on the prosecution. Reference in this connection is made to the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Javed Masood and Another Vs. State of Rajasthan, AIR 2010 Supreme Court 979, Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 248 paragraphs 9, 10, 13 to 16. Placing reliance over the judgment in the case of Javed Masood (supra) it is observed that in view of the evidence of P.Ws. 19, 25, 14 which has not been challenged by the prosecution the presence of the eye witnesses P.Ws. 8 to 10 at the place, time of occurrence becomes doubtful. The examination in chief of Ravindra Nath Singh, Subodh Yadav, P.Ws. 7, 20 in paragraph 1 indicate that on 8.6.1998 P.W. 7 had come to Purnea Bar Library to meet a friend Advocate where he learnt from his old acquaintance Subodh Yadav, P.W. 20 that Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav had called Rajan Tiwary to Purnea who is about to kill M.L.A. Dilip Yadav and Ajit Sarkar as P.W. 20 had given to him a written piece of paper in which it was so written. Aforesaid evidence of P.Ws. 7, 20 cannot be accepted for the failure of P.Ws. 7, 20 to take any step in the matter including lodging of the F.I.R. against Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav and Rajan Tiwary. Having not lodged F.I.R. strong inference of falsehood of the said statement and existence of piece of paper dated 8.6.1998 has to be drawn and consequential benefit given to the appellants. The evidence of Domai Thakur P.W. 15 and Shambhoo Prasad Mehta, P.W. 16 that they had seen Anil Yadav, Harish Chaudhary, Amar Yadav and one unknown in Harda Market in the afternoon of 14.6.1998 taking rounds on the market road over red bullet and black motorcycle and thereafter followed the car of the deceased is also not worthy of credence in view of the evidence of Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 249 I.O. C.B.I., P.W. 61 vide paragraphs 109, 289 that P.Ws. 15, 16 had not made such statement before him. Reliance placed by the prosecution on telephone print out Ext. 3 series to establish the conspiracy hatched by the appellant for elimination of Ajit Sarkar is also misplaced. Perusal of Ext. 3 series indicates that call of long duration was made in the morning of 14.6.1998 from Delhi residence of appellant Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav to his Purnea residence. The print out further indicates that on the date of occurrence at 18 hours 16 minute 48 second call of 42 second duration and at 18 hours 18 minute 16 second call of 32 second duration was made from Katihar P.C.O. telephone no. 34679 to Delhi residence of appellant Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav on telephone no. 3730767 subscribed in his name and on telephone no. 3736358 subscribed in the name of his wife. On the same day at 20 hours 08 minute 41 second call from the same P.C.O. of one minute 26 second duration was made to Gorakhpur residence of appellant Rajan Tiwary on telephone no. 0551322035. From the print out Ext. 3 series, the evidence of Ramashray Rajak, P.W. 6 officer of the telephone company who issued print out and Om Prakash Ramnani, P.W. 52 husband of the telephone booth owner, it is impossible to identify either the caller or the called or the contents of their conversation, as such, it is not safe to rely on the print out, Ext. 3 series in support of the prosecution case. In this connection, it may be stated here that this Court categorically asked the Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 250 counsel for the C.B.I. to indicate the material on the basis of which it is concluded by C.B.I. that telephone no. 0551322035 is the telephone subscribed by appellant Rajan Tiwary at his Gorakhpur residence. Counsel could not refer to any material, as such, it is difficult for this Court to accept the submission that Rajan Tiwary made call of one minute 26 second duration from Katihar P.C.O. booth no. 34679 to his Gorakhpur residence on 14.6.1998 at 20 hours 08 minute 41 second. Recovery of the two steel core portions from the car of the deceased on 3.3.1999 and the report of Rup Singh, P.W. 33 dated 22.3.1999, Ext. 9/1 that the aforesaid two steel core portions were fired from 7.62 MM assault rifle cannot be relied upon as possibility of plantation of the two steel core portions in the car of the deceased cannot be ruled out after its release by the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Purnea under order dated 25.7.1998 in favour of Madhvi Bose (Sarkar), wife of the deceased, whereafter the car was parked in the garage of Nitu da for repair wherefrom the two steel core portions were recovered on 3.3.1999 i.e. after about 9 months of the occurrence. Photograph, material Ext. VII in which appellant Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav his wife and child are seen with appellant Rajan Tiwary is indicative of the association between the two appellants seen in the photograph but association simplicitor does not establish hatching and execution of conspiracy by them and others.

Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 251 Judicial Confession

177. Having considered the merit of the deposition of P.Ws. 7 to 10, 14 to 16, 19, 20 and 25, the documentary evidence, Ext. 3 series, material Ext. VII, I proceed to consider the validity of the judicial confession recorded by Rajan Tiwary on 22.2.1999 before Sri G.S. Saini, Metropolitan Magistrate, New Delhi, P.W. 59. Delhi police arrested Rajan Tiwary on 12.2.1999 in connection with R.K. Puram P.S. Case No. 122/99 registered for the offence under Section 25 of the Arms Act and produced him before Sri K.S. Mohi, Metropolitan Magistrate, Patiala House, Delhi on 13.2.1999 in connection with R.K. Puram P.S. Case No. 122/99 vide remand application dated 13.2.1999 filed by S.I. Palvinder Singh of Special Team, Crime Branch, Delhi, Ext. F/4. Perusal of Ext. F/4 indicates that the Metropolitan Magistrate having considered the contents of the application passed orders for remand of Rajan Tiwary to judicial custody until 26.2.1999. I.O. C.B.I, P.W. 61, however, obtained custody of Rajan Tiwary in muffled condition with warrant, which would appear from endorsement made by P.W. 61 on copy of remand application dated 13.2.1999, Ext. F. Counsel for the parties made lengthy submission about the legality or otherwise of the nature of custody of Rajan Tiwary obtained by I.O. C.B.I. on 13.2.1999. Nature of the custody of Rajan Tiwary obtained by I.O. C.B.I., P.W. 61 on 13.2.1999 shall be considered a little later. P.W. 61 having obtained the Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 252 custody of Rajan Tiwary subjected him to sustained interrogation by moving him from Delhi to Purnea and back. Rajan Tiwary is said to have made disclosures on 18/17.2.1999 leading to recoveries vide Exts. 1/8, 1/9, 1/10. Rajan Tiwary having made disclosures was produced before the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi on 22.2.1999 and a petition, Ext. 41 was filed to examine Rajan Tiwary under Section 164 Cr.P.C. Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi endorsed Ext. 41 to Sri G.S. Saini, Metropolitan Magistrate, P.W. 59 vide endorsement Ext. 36 made over Ext. 41. Ext. 41 was considered by Sri Saini on the same day i.e. 22.2.1999 and Sri Saini directed over Ext. 41 itself that accused be produced before him at 12.30 P.M. Rajan Tiwary with muffled face was produced by I.O. C.B.I., P.W. 61 before Sri G.S. Saini at 12.30 P.M. who directed P.W. 61 to go out of court and accused be made to sit in court, proceeding be recorded in separate sheet vide endorsement made by Sri Saini, Ext. 36/1 over Ext. 41. From perusal of proceeding in separate sheet maintained by Sri Saini on 22.2.1999 at 12.30 P.M., it appears that application for recording of statement of accused Rajan Tiwary was moved before learned Chief Metropolitan Magistrate and the same was assigned to Sri Saini. Accused Rajan Tiwary with muffled face was produced before Sri Saini. Sri Saini sent all the police persons out of court and the accused was made to sit in his Chamber. He explained to the accused that he is not bound to make his statement. He Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 253 also told Rajan Tiwary that if he makes the statement, it can be used against him as evidence. Rajan Tiwary insisted in making the statement. Sri Saini thereafter gave Rajan Tiwary one hour time to reflect over the matter again. Sri Saini again asked Rajan Tiwary at 1.15 P.M. in his Chamber whether he wants to record his confessional statement. Rajan Tiwary stated that he wants to bring real culprit to book and is making statement voluntarily. Sri Saini again warned Rajan Tiwary that he is not bound to make confessional statement and his statement shall be used as evidence against him but Rajan Tiwary insisted again for making statement. Sri Saini thereafter put following two questions to Rajan Tiwary (1) Why do you want to make confessional statement? Rajan Tiwary answered that he wants to make statement as he wants to improve himself and to disclose the identity of the real culprit. In answer to the second question as to whether he has been pressurized by the police or C.B.I. to make statement, Rajan Tiwary answered that he has not been pressurized by any one to record his statement. Having put the question and recorded the answer of Rajan Tiwary Sri Saini put his own signature on the right hand side of page 2 of the proceeding drawn in separate sheet and obtained signature of Rajan Tiwary on the left hand side of page 2 of the proceeding. Signature of Rajan Tiwary over the proceeding has been marked as Ext. 34. Beneath the signature of Rajan Tiwary, Ext. 34 Sri Saini recorded his satisfaction that Rajan Tiwary is Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 254 making confessional statement voluntarily without any force from any quarter in order to make clean breast and then proceeded to record his statement, which begins from page 3 and concludes at page 6 of the proceeding. At the bottom of the confessional statement at page 6 of the proceeding Sri Saini and Rajan Tiwary again put their signature. Signature of Rajan Tiwary at page 6 is marked as Ext. 34/1. After recording of confessional statement P.W. 61 identified accused Rajan Tiwary and endorsement to that effect is in the left hand margin of page 6 of the proceeding. Beneath the signature of Sri Saini and Rajan Tiwary at page 6 of the proceeding memorandum in terms of Sub-section (4) of Section 164 Cr.P.C. has been recorded by Sri Saini. At page 7 of the proceeding Sri Saini has certified that the above proceeding conducted in his Chamber is the true and correct account of the proceeding and nothing has been added or subtracted therefrom. Having recorded the proceeding Sri Saini directed the office to send the proceedings in sealed cover to the office of learned Chief Metropolitan Magistrate after giving one copy to the I.O. C.B.I., P.W. 61. Having recorded the confession of Rajan Tiwary Sri Saini, P.W. 59 handed over the custody of Rajan Tiwary to I.O. C.B.I., P.W. 61, which is evident from the evidence of P.W. 59, paragraph 17, 29, 32. Aforesaid conduct of Sri Saini, P.W. 59 to hand over the custody of Rajan Tiwary to I.O. C.B.I. after recording his confessional statement is contrary to Rule 7 framed by Delhi High Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 255 Court. From perusal of proceeding recorded in separate sheet, Ext. 35, it does not appear that Sri Saini, P.W. 59 informed Rajan Tiwary that he is a Magistrate. It also does not appear from the proceeding that P.W. 59 put searching questions to Rajan Tiwary about the custody from which he has been produced and the treatment which was given to him during the period of his remand between 13.2.1999-22.2.1999 when he was being moved from Delhi to Purnea and back and is said to have made disclosure statements on 18/17.2.1999 leading to recoveries vide Exts. 1/8, 1/9, 1/10. It only appears from proceeding in separate sheet, Ext. 35 that Rajan Tiwary was insisting to record his confessional statement which is proof of coercion. It also does not appear from the proceeding that while P.W. 59 observed safeguards under Sub-section (2) of Section 164 Cr.P.C. and informed Rajan Tiwary that he is not bound to make confessional statement and if he makes one the confessional statement shall be used against him in evidence, observed safeguard under Sub- section (3) of Section 164 Cr.P.C. which require the Magistrate recording confessional statement to lend assurance to the accused recording confessional statement that if he chooses not to record his confessional statement he shall not be sent back to the custody from which he has been produced. In my opinion, Sri Saini was required to have observed not only the safeguard under Sub-section (2) of Section 164 Cr.P.C. but also Sub-section (3) of Section 164 as both the Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 256 safeguards provided in Sub-sections (2), (3) of Section 164 Cr.P.C. are to be read in conjunction for securing the mandate of Articles 20, 21 and 22 of the Constitution of India. Reliance in this connection be placed over the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Shivappa Vs. State of Karnataka, (1995) 2 SCC 76 quoted with approval in Ravindra Kumar Pal @ Dara Singh Vs. Republic of India, AIR 2011 SC 1436, paragraphs 30, 31 and Mohammed Ajmal Mohammed Amir Kasab @ Abu Mujahid Vs. State of Maharashtra, (2012) 9 SCC 169.

178. I.O. C.B.I., P.W. 61 obtained custody of Rajan Tiwary on 13.2.1999, after nine days of sustained interrogation leading to disclosure, recoveries on 18/17.2.1999 produced him in the court of Sri Saini on 22.2.1999 at 12.30 P.M. for recording his confessional statement, whereafter Sri Saini allowed Rajan Tiwary 45 minutes time to reflect and proceeded to record his confession at 1.15 P.M. Rajan Tiwary having remained in C.B.I. custody for nine days in which he was kept incommunicado, subjected to sustained interrogation leading to disclosures, recovery on 18/17.2.1999 was granted 45 minutes for reflection. Grant of 45 minutes for reflection in the facts and circumstances of the case, in my opinion, does not appear to be reasonable as 45 minutes is not enough to completely free Rajan Tiwary from the possible influence of the C.B.I. The effective way for securing such freedom from fear of C.B.I. was to send Rajan Tiwary to jail Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 257 custody and to grant him adequate time to consider whether he should make confession at all. In the instant case, Rajan Tiwary after sustained interrogation of nine days was produced by the I.O. of C.B.I., P.W. 61 before P.W. 59 on 22.2.1999 at 12.30 P.M. for recording his confessional statement, whereafter P.W. 59 asked the police official producing Rajan Tiwary to go out of his court and asked Rajan Tiwary to wait in his Chamber where none of the police official remained present. Recording of confession began at 1.15 P.M. on the same day. After recording the confessional statement of Rajan Tiwary the police officer producing Rajan Tiwary i.e. I.O. C.B.I., P.W. 61 was asked to identify Rajan Tiwary and P.W. 61 identified Rajan Tiwary by putting his signature by the side of the signature of Rajan Tiwary, Ext. 34/1. The confessional statement of Rajan Tiwary may not have been recorded in presence of the C.B.I. official i.e. I.O. C.B.I., P.W. 61 who produced him on 22.2.1999 for recording confessional statement. The statement was recorded 45 minutes after production without granting Rajan Tiwary reasonable, sufficient time for reflection, after recording the statement Rajan Tiwary was not only identified by P.W. 61 but his custody was also given to P.W. 61, there cannot be any doubt that the confessional statement of Rajan Tiwary was recorded by P.W. 59 under the shadow of I.O. C.B.I., P.W. 61. Rajan Tiwary was not granted reasonable and sufficient time to relieve himself of the pressure generated by the Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 258 investigators of C.B.I. during the period of sustained interrogation between 13.2.1999-22.2.1999 which is evident from the fact that he was insisting before Sri Saini, P.W. 59 to record his confession. Aforesaid finding is being reached in the background of the fact that P.W. 59 did not observe the safeguards required under Sub-section (3) of Section 164 Cr.P.C. as he did not lend assurance to Rajan Tiwary that if he chooses not to record his confessional statement he will not be remanded to C.B.I. custody and shall be sent to judicial custody. Reliance in this connection is placed on the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Sarwan Singh Rattan Singh Vs. State of Punjab, AIR 1957 SC 637, paragraph 10, Kartar Singh Vs. State of Punjab, (1994) 3 SCC 569, paragraph 390. In the case of Sarwan Singh (Supra) Supreme Court observed that it would be reasonable to insist upon giving an accused person at least 24 hours to decide whether or not he should make a confession. In the case of Kartar Singh (supra) Supreme Court upheld the vires of Section 15 of the Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act, 1987 as amended by TADA (Amendment) Act, 1993 providing for recording of confession by a person before a police officer not lower in rank than a Superintendent of Police. The leading judgment in the case of Kartar Singh (supra) was authored by Pandian, J. In paragraphs 262, 263 Pandian, J upheld the vires of the aforesaid Act without indicating the duration of reasonable time which should be Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 259 allowed to the accused person for reflection if he is coming forward to record his confession. K. Ramaswamy, J in his separate judgment placing reliance on the judgment of Sarwan Singh (supra) in paragraph 390 observed ―it is settled law that at least 24 hours should be given to the accused to decide whether or not he should make a confession‖. The submission of the counsel for the C.B.I. that the view of Ramaswamy, J is a minority view does not appear to be correct as in the majority opinion Pandian, J has not indicated the duration of time which should be allowed to an accused for reflection who is coming forward to record his confession. Similarly, reliance placed by the counsel for the C.B.I. over the judgment in the case of Shankaria Vs. State of Rajasthan (supra) to justify reflection time of 45 minutes to Rajan Tiwary is also misconceived. Perusal of judgment in the case of Shankaria (supra) would indicate that Shankaria was produced before learned Magistrate on 12.6.1974 who lodged him in judicial lock up. On 13.6.1974 application was filed before Judicial Magistrate requesting him to record the confessional statement of Shankaria. The Magistrate thereafter ordered that Shankaria be produced from judicial lock up on 14.6.1974 at 7 A.M. for recording his confession. Shankaria was accordingly, produced before the Magistrate for recording his confession on 14.6.1974 at 7 A.M. The Magistrate after putting questions to Shankaria about the voluntary nature of the statement allowed Shankaria some time Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 260 for reflection and proceeded to record his confession from 8.45 A.M. Supreme Court in the background of the fact that Shankaria was sent by the Magistrate to judicial lock up on 12.6.1974 wherefrom he was produced to record his confession on 14.6.1974 at 7 A.M. and his confession was recorded from 8.45 A.M. onwards rejected the submission of Shankaria that he was not granted sufficient time for reflection. In the case in hand, custody of Rajan Tiwary was obtained by P.W. 61 on 13.2.1999 whereafter Rajan Tiwary was moved from Delhi to Purnea and back, kept incommunicado, subjected to sustained interrogation vide paragraph 57 of the evidence of P.W. 61 and then produced for recording his confession before P.W. 59 on 22.2.1999 at 12.30 P.M. who allowed Rajan Tiwary one hour time for reflection but proceeded to record his confession at 1.15 P.M., which is indicative of the fact that Rajan Tiwary was not allowed reasonable and sufficient time for reflection before recording his confession by P.W. 59.

179. Failure to observe the safeguard provided under Sub- section (3) of Section 164 Cr.P.C. and to lend assurance to Rajan Tiwary that in case he chooses not to make confession he shall not be remanded to C.B.I. custody, failure to grant Rajan Tiwary sufficient, reasonable time for reflection, coupled with the fact that after recording confession of Rajan Tiwary his custody was handed over to I.O. C.B.I. who produced him for recording confession violating Rule 7 of the Delhi Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 261 High Court Rules, in the opinion of this Court cannot be condoned with reference to the mandate of Section 463 Cr.P.C. as from the entire evidence of the prosecution including the evidence of P.Ws. 59, 61 it does not appear as to why the prosecution did not comply the requirement of Sub-section (3) of Section 164 Cr.P.C. and lend assurance to Rajan Tiwary that in case he chooses not to record his confession his custody shall not be handed over to the C.B.I. From the prosecution evidence it also does not appear as to why Rajan Tiwary after his production by the I.O. C.B.I. on 22.2.1999 for recording his confession was not granted sufficient, reasonable time for reflection by remanding him to jail custody with direction to produce him on the next day for recording his confession. It also does not appear from the prosecution evidence as to why custody of Rajan Tiwary was handed over to I.O. C.B.I., P.W. 61 after he recorded his confession violating Rule 7 of the Delhi High Court Rules.

180. According to the evidence of P.W. 59 in paragraph 22 the confessional statement of Rajan Tiwary is in continuation from page nos. 3 to 6 of Ext. 35. Signature of Rajan Tiwary was obtained on page nos. 3, 4 and 5 of Ext. 35 but perusal of Ext. 35 indicates that signature of Rajan Tiwary is not taken on page nos. 3, 4 and 5 as claimed by P.W.

59. Though Rajan Tiwary is said to have recorded his confessional statement Ext. 35 on 22.2.1999 but the same was produced in court on Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 262 17.11.2005 without there being any explanation for such delay. In this connection, P.W. 59 in paragraph 95 of his evidence further stated that C.B.I. officials never approached him for making fair copy of the confessional statement of Rajan Tiwary for the purpose of supply to the accused persons.

181. For the reasons indicated above in paragraphs 177 to 180, it is not safe to rely on the confessional statement of Rajan Tiwary, Ext. 35 when the same has been retracted by Rajan Tiwary after he was remanded to judicial custody on 23.2.1999 in Tihar Jail vide undated retraction which was forwarded by the Deputy Superintendent, Central Jail No. 5, Tihar, New Delhi under letter no. 181 dated 1.3.1999 to Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi and was filed before this Court by Rajan Tiwary by way of supplementary affidavit dated 28.9.2004 in Cr. Misc. No. 10646 of 2003 and submission to the contrary made by the counsel for the C.B.I. noted in paragraph 126 of this judgment that on 9.3.1999 Rajan Tiwary was produced from judicial custody in the court of Chief Metropolitan Magistrate Sri R.K. Gauba with his Advocate Sri S.A. Hasmi but no retraction was made by him is incorrect.

182. It may be stated here that confessional statement of an accomplice is admissible under the Indian Evidence Act but requires corroboration in material particulars by other independent evidence. This Court in paragraph 176 above doubted the ocular, found documentary Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 263 evidence of no consequence, does not feel confident to rely on the confessional statement, Ext. 35 for the reasons given in paragraphs 177 to 181 above.

183. Submission of the counsel for the appellant Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav with regard to the vires of Section 30 of the Evidence Act in the light of the 69th report of the Law Commission of India and the provisions of the Constitution is not being considered in the present case in view of my finding that in the facts of the present case it is unsafe to rely on the confessional statement made by Rajan Tiwary.

184. Now we proceed to consider the validity of the custody of Rajan Tiwary obtained by P.W. 61 on 13.2.1999 vide endorsement ―received accused in muffled condition with warrant‖ made by P.W. 61 in the margin of remand application dated 13.2.1999, Ext. F filed by S.I. Palvinder Singh, Special Team Crime Branch in the court of Duty Metropolitan Magistrate, Patiala House in connection with R.K. Puram P.S. Case No. 122/99 dated 12.2.1999 under Section 25 of the Arms Act praying inter alia to remand Rajan Tiwary for 14 days judicial custody in the said case. It appears after receipt of the remand application dated 13.2.1999 the Magistrate passed orders ―received accused from police custody remanded to judicial custody till 26.2.1999‖, which is evident from remand application dated 13.2.1999 Ext. F. It, however, appears Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 264 from copy of remand application dated 13.2.1999, Ext. F/4 filed by S.I. Palvinder Singh in connection with R.K. Puram P.S. Case No. 122/99, which is addressed to Sri K.S. Mohi, Metropolitan Magistrate, Patiala House, Delhi praying inter alia for judicial custody of Rajan Tiwary in R.K. Puram P.S. Case No. 122/99 for 14 days. Magistrate having considered the prayer passed the same order ―received accused from police custody remanded to judicial custody till 26.2.1999‖, Ext. F/4 does not contain endorsement by P.W. 61 in the margin of remand application ―received accused in muffled condition with warrant‖. Having perused the aforesaid two remand application, Exts. F, F/4 filed in R.K. Puram P.S. Case No. 122/99 and the order dated 13.2.1999 passed by Metropolitan Magistrate ―received accused from police custody remanded to judicial custody till 26.2.1999 including the fact that endorsement made by P.W. 61 ―received accused in muffled condition with warrant‖ was not made by P.W. 61 on Ext. F/4, this Court asked the counsel for the C.B.I. to produce the order on the basis of which P.W. 61 received accused Rajan Tiwary in muffled condition with warrant on 13.2.1999 as the order of the Magistrate which was passed on petition, Exts. F, F/4 was only to the effect that received accused from police custody remanded to judicial custody till 26.2.1999. Counsel for the C.B.I. then submitted that before Rajan Tiwary could be lodged in judicial custody in Tihar Jail pursuant to order dated 13.2.1999 passed Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 265 by Sri K.S. Mohi/Duty Magistrate another order was passed on the same day i.e. 13.2.1999 (Second Saturday) by Duty Magistrate on the basis of disclosure made by Rajan Tiwary to Delhi police authorizing his custody to C.B.I. for 10 days i.e. until 23.2.1999. In the light of the subsequent order passed by the Duty Magistrate on the same day P.W. 61 received Rajan Tiwary in muffled condition with warrant and made such endorsement on the petition dated 13.2.1999, Ext. F. In the light of the aforesaid submission of the counsel for the C.B.I. this Court directed the learned counsel for the C.B.I. to produce the subsequent order dated 13.2.1999 passed by the Duty Magistrate authorizing C.B.I. custody of Rajan Tiwary until 23.2.1999. Counsel for the C.B.I. then submitted that the subsequent order passed by the Duty Magistrate on 13.2.1999 may be available in the record of R.K. Puram P.S. Case No. 122/99. To verify the aforesaid submission of the learned counsel for the C.B.I. this Court under order dated 12.2.2013 called for the records of R.K. Puram P.S. Case No. 122/99 which was received in this Court on 18.2.2013. With the assistance of the counsel for the parties records of R.K. Puram P.S. Case No. 122/99 was examined but neither the original nor the copy of the subsequent order dated 13.2.1999 passed by the Duty Magistrate authorizing C.B.I. custody of Rajan Tiwary until 23.2.1999 was found in the records of R.K. Puram P.S. Case No. 122/99. Learned counsel for the C.B.I. then submitted that copy of subsequent order dated 13.2.1999 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 266 may not be available in the records of R.K. Puram P.S. Case No. 122/99 but copy thereof having been filed by Rajan Tiwary himself as Annexure-8 series to the supplementary affidavit filed by him in Cr. Misc. No. 10646 of 2003 (Rajan Tiwary Vs. The State of Bihar through C.B.I.) before this Court, there should not be any dispute/doubt about the existence of the order dated 13.2.1999. Perusal of supplementary affidavit dated 28.9.2004 filed by Rajan Tiwary in Cr. Misc. No. 10646 of 2003 do indicate that copy of order dated 13.2.1999 authorising C.B.I. custody of Rajan Tiwary until 23.2.1999 has been annexed with the said affidavit. From perusal of Xerox copy of the order dated 13.2.1999 filed along with supplementary affidavit dated 28.9.2004 in Cr. Misc. No. 10646 of 2003 on 29.9.2004 it appears that said order was passed in first information No. RC 12(S)/98-SIC-IV/New Delhi. It, however, does not appear from perusal of the said order as to who is the author of the order dated 13.2.1999 authorising C.B.I. remand of Rajan Tiwary until 23.2.1999. Another Xerox copy of order dated 13.2.1999 authorising C.B.I. remand of Rajan Tiwary until 23.2.1999 produced by learned counsel for C.B.I. during hearing of this appeal indicates that the said order was passed in R.K. Puram P.S. Case No. 122/99 but from perusal of said order also it does not appear as to who is the author of the order dated 13.2.1999 authorising C.B.I. remand of Rajan Tiwary until 23.2.1999. Certified copy of the order dated 13.2.1999 authorising C.B.I. Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 267 remand of Rajan Tiwary until 23.2.1999 being not available either in the record of R.K. Puram P.S. Case No. 122/99 or in the record of RC 12(S)/98-SIC-IV/New Delhi, it is difficult for this Court to uphold the contention of the C.B.I. that as Xerox copy of the order dated 13.2.1999 authorising C.B.I. remand of Rajan Tiwary until 23.2.1999 has been filed by Rajan Tiwary himself there cannot be any doubt about the existence of the said order. It is observed that Rajan Tiwary being in custody his pairvikar filed copy of order dated 13.2.1999 before this Court by way of supplementary affidavit on 29.9.2004 in Cr. Misc. No. 10646 of 2003 but no sooner Rajan Tiwary discovered the fact that order dated 13.2.1999 authorising his remand to C.B.I. custody until 23.2.1999 is not in existence he obtained certified copy of remand application, Ext. F, F/4 and submitted before the trial court that forgery has been committed in judicial record by writing Duty Magistrate after cutting K.S. Mohi at the top of remand application, Ext. F and thereafter his custody obtained by I.O., C.B.I., P.W. 61 on 13.2.1999 by writing in the margin of Ext. F ―received accused in muffled condition with warrant‖. Copy of Ext. F was also shown to Special Public Prosecutor, C.B.I. on 21.5.2007 when remand application was admitted in evidence vide Ext. F. The trial court noticed the aforesaid submission and found in paragraph 41 of its judgment that in Ext. F after cutting K.S. Mohi Duty Magistrate has been written and then observed that enquiry about cutting Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 268 and writing of Duty Magistrate in Ext. F be made by Delhi Court in whose record the forgery was committed. C.B.I. authorities have not challenged the aforesaid finding of the trial court.

185. Now I come to consider the validity of the order dated 15.9.1999 passed by the Special Magistrate, C.B.I., Patna discharging F.I.R. named accused i.e. Bipin Singh @ Bipin Chaudhary, Jawahar Yadav, Abdul Sattar, Diwakar Chaudhary and Pappu Dev of K.Hat P.S. Case No. 230/98 sent up for trial by the Purnea police under charge sheet no. 210/98 dated 20.9.1998 in the court of Chief Judicial Magistrate, Purnea on the basis of which Chief Judicial Magistrate, Purnea having taken cognizance of the offence summoned those accused to face trail under order dated 23.9.1998. Investigation of K.Hat P.S. Case No. 230/98 was entrusted to C.B.I. by the Government of India under notification dated 28.9.1998 whereafter for administrative convenience C.B.I. registered RC 12(S)/98-SIC-IV/New Delhi incorporating the contents of F.I.R. of K. Hat P.S. Case No. 230/98 and entrusted its investigation to Sri N.S. Kharayat, Dy. S.P., C.B.I, P.W. 61 who along with his team proceeded with the investigation and submitted charge sheet dated 10.5.1999 and supplementary charge sheet dated 19.8.1999 under Sub-section (8) of Section 173 Cr.P.C. finding the accusation true against the appellants and two others and not true against Bipin Singh @ Bipin Chaudhary, Jawahar Yadav, Abdul Sattar, Diwakar Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 269 Chaudhary and Pappu Dev who were sent up for trial by the Purnea police under charge sheet dated 20.9.1998 filed under Sub-section (2) of Section 173 Cr.P.C and summoned to face trial by Chief Judicial Magistrate, Purnea under order dated 23.9.1998. In the light of the findings recorded by P.W. 61 in charge sheet dated 10.5.1999 that accusation was not true against Bipin Singh @ Bipin Chaudhary, Jawahar Yadav, Abdul Sattar, Diwakar Chaudhary and Pappu Dev P.W. 61 not only recommended for their discharge but also filed separate application dated 15.9.1999 before the Special Magistrate C.B.I., Patna for discharge of accused persons sent up for trial by the Purnea police under charge sheet dated 20.9.1998. Special Magistrate C.B.I., Patna under order dated 15.9.1999 discharged the accused sent up for trial by the Purnea police under charge sheet dated 20.9.1998. Aforesaid order dated 15.9.1999 passed by the Special Magistrate C.B.I., Patna is wholly without jurisdiction. At the relevant time competent Investigating Agency, i.e. Purnea police on the basis of the material collected during investigation found the accusation true against five F.I.R. named accused persons of K.Hat P.S. Case No. 230/98, submitted charge sheet dated 20.9.1998 under Sub-section (2) of Section 173 Cr.P.C on the basis of which competent court i.e. Chief Judicial Magistrate, Purnea summoned the five F.I.R. named accused persons under order dated 23.9.1998 to face the trial. I.O. C.B.I., P.W. 61 while further Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 270 investigating K.Hat P.S. Case No. 230/98 did not find accusation true against the five F.I.R. named accused i.e. Bipin Singh @ Bipin Chaudhary, Jawahar Yadav, Abdul Sattar, Diwakar Chaudhary and Pappu Dev of K.Hat P.S. Case No. 230/98. P.W. 61 ought not to have recommended for their discharge under charge sheet dated 10.5.1999 as also filed petition dated 15.9.1999 for such purpose. Similarly C.B.I. Magistrate while committing RC 12(S)/98-SIC-IV/New Delhi for its trial by Additional Sessions Judge-XI cum C.B.I. Court, Patna ought not to have discharged the F.I.R. named accused under order dated 15.9.1999, which is wholly without jurisdiction. In any case, the trial court i.e. Additional Sessions Judge-XI cum C.B.I. Court, Patna after receipt of the records of K. Hat P.S. Case No. 230/98 from Chief Judicial Magistrate, Purnea on 7.1.2002 in compliance of the order of the High Court dated 11.12.2001 passed in Cr. Revision No. 883 of 2001 should have summoned Bipin Singh @ Bipin Chaudhary, Jawahar Yadav, Abdul Sattar, Diwakar Chaudhary and Pappu Dev the five F.I.R. named accused persons of K. Hat P.S. Case No. 230/98 to face trial along with these appellants. Trial court having tried the appellants alone who have been sent up for trial by the C.B.I. under charge sheet dated 10.5.1999 and supplementary charge sheet dated 19.8.1999 filed under Sub-section (8) of Section 173 Cr.P.C and not the five F.I.R. named accused of K. Hat P.S. Case No. 230/98 who were sent up for trial by the Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 271 Purnea police under charge sheet dated 20.9.1998 filed under Sub- section (2) of Section 173 Cr.P.C and summoned to face trial under order dated 23.9.1998 has committed gross injustice and illegality as the five F.I.R. named accused persons against whom the accusation was found true by the competent Investigating Agency i.e. Purnea police under Sub-section (2) of Section 173 Cr.P.C on the basis of which those accused persons were summoned to face trial by the competent court i.e. Chief Judicial Magistrate, Purnea under order dated 23.9.1998 have been let off on the recommendation of the Investigating Agency which was entrusted with further investigation of the case. Neither the agency further investigating the case i.e. C.B.I. nor the C.B.I. Magistrate, Patna had the jurisdiction to let off five F.I.R. named accused sent up for trial by the Purnea police under Sub-section (2) of Section 173 Cr.P.C. and summoned to face trial by the competent court under order dated 23.9.1998. After receipt of the record of K. Hat P.S. Case No. 230/98 in compliance of the order of the High Court dated 11.12.2001 passed in Cr. Revision No. 883 of 2001 it was the bounden duty of the Trial Judge to have issued fresh summons to those who were erroneously let off by the C.B.I. Magistrate, Patna under order dated 15.9.1999 as neither the Delhi High Court under order dated 5.5.1999 passed in Cr. Writ Petition No. 258 of 1999 nor this Court under order dated 20.3.2002 reported in 2002 (4) PLJR 327 referred to in paragraphs 91, 92 and 93 of this Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 272 judgment approved discharge of five F.I.R. named accused of K. Hat P.S. Case No. 230/98. Reliance in this connection be placed over the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of T.T. Antony Vs. State of Kerala and others, AIR 2001 SC 2637, Rama Chaudhary Vs. State of Bihar, AIR 2009 SC 2308 and Vinay Teyagi Vs. Irshad Ali @ Deepak and others., 2013 CRI.L.J. 754.

186. There is yet another aspect of the matter. The trial court in the light of the evidence recorded by A.K. Jha, P.W. 56 in court, who scribed the fardbeyan dated 14.6.1998, Ext. 27, recorded the further statement of the informant, P.W. 8 and the statement of the two eye witnesses, P.Ws. 9, 10 during the night between 14-15.6.1998 as also took various other steps in investigation and then filed charge sheet no. 210 dated 20.9.1998 against the five F.I.R. named accused persons as also in the light of the evidence of P.W. 61 who did not find fault with the investigation conducted by P.W. 56 (vide paragraph 216 of his evidence) and further did not give reason in his charge sheet for not accepting the charge sheet submitted by Purnea police (vide paragraph 235 of his evidence), exercising its power under Section 319 Cr.P.C. should have summoned the accused let off by the Special Magistrate, C.B.I. under order dated 15.9.1999. In the absence of accused persons let off by the C.B.I. Magistrate the trial of the appellants is an abuse of the process of the court as other set of accused sent up for trial for the same Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.418 of 2008 dt.17-05-2013 273 offence have been let off by the C.B.I. Magistrate under order dated 15.9.1999 on the recommendation of another Investigating Agency without undergoing the due process of trial which has occasioned in failure of justice. It was for the court to decide the correctness of the investigation conducted by the two separate Investigating Agency fixing the identity of the two different set of accused, one set of accused named in the F.I.R. and the other set of accused named for the first time before the C.B.I. authorities. By trying these appellants alone after letting off the other set of accused named in the F.I.R. the dice has been loaded exclusively against these appellants which has occasioned in failure of justice.

187. In view of my findings and observations in paragraphs 176 to 182, 184 to 186 above, the three appellants deserve to be granted benefit of doubt. The impugned judgment and the order of sentence dated 14.02.2008 is set aside. Appellant Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav is directed to be released forthwith, if not required in any other case. Appellants Anil Kumar Yadav and Rajan Tiwary are discharged from their bail bonds.

(V.N. Sinha, J) Amaresh Kumar Lal, J : I agree.


(Amaresh Kumar Lal, J) Rajesh/AFR

Related AI tags, queries and research notes
Translation

Select Language
Top AI Tags
confession-recording, recording-of-statement
evidence-by-refusal-of-production
examine-accused
criminal-procedure-code
Related user Queries
pillion rider
supplementary charge sheet
test identification parade
307/34
rajesh ranjan @ pappu yadav
section 164 of code of criminal procedure
section 164 crpc
307 ipc
police custody
kalyan chandra sarkar
arms act
confession
recording of confession
302/34
case diary
statement under section 164 cr.p.c
confessional statements
remand application
pappu yadav
identification parade
About
Disclaimer
Privacy Policy
Terms

================================================================================


================================================================================
CASE 25:[Cites 33, Cited by 0]
Allahabad High Court
Smt Hasina Bano vs Mohammad Ehsan on 12 September, 2024
Author: Vivek Kumar Birla
Bench: Vivek Kumar Birla




HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
 
 


A.F.R.
 
Reserved
 
Neutral Citation No. - 2024:AHC:149103-DB
 
In Chamber
 

 
Case :- FIRST APPEAL No. - 495 of 2024
 
Appellant :- Smt Hasina Bano
 
Respondent :- Mohammad Ehsan
 
Counsel for Appellant :- Bhriguram Ji,Shashi Shekhar Maurya
 
Counsel for Respondent :- Nilesh Kumar Dubey
 

 
Hon'ble Vivek Kumar Birla,J.
 
Hon'ble Syed Qamar Hasan Rizvi,J.

(Per: Hon'ble Syed Qamar Hasan Rizvi,J.) On the application for condonation of delay As per the report submitted by the Registry, the present appeal under Section 19 of the Family Court Act, 1984 is barred by limitation as the same has been preferred by the appellant beyond 148 days of the prescribed limitation period. The cause of delay as explained by the appellant in the present application for condonation of delay duly supported by an affidavit is found satisfactory. The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent has no objection against the aforesaid condonation of delay. Accordingly, delay in filing this appeal is condoned.

The present application for condonation of delay having application No. 01 of 2024 is allowed.

On the Memo of Appeal

1. Heard Sri Bhriguram Ji Pandey along with Sri Shashi Shekhar Maurya, learned counsels for the appellant and Sri Nilesh Kumar Dubey, learned counsel appearing for the respondent.

2. The present appeal under section 19 of the Family Court Act, 1984 has been filed, inter alia, praying for setting aside the impugned judgment and order dated 10.10.2023 and also the decree dated 19.10.2023 passed by the Additional Principal Judge, Family Court, Jhansi in Declaration Case No. 687/2021 whereby the 'Suit for declaration of the matrimonial status' of the parties has been dismissed. It has also been prayed that this Court may, in exercise of its appellate jurisdiction allow the said Suit, by declaring the matrimonial status of the parties as 'divorced' by way of mubara'at, as recognised under the Muslim Personal Law.

3. Facts of the case that are culled out from the material available on record is that the marriage between the appellant and the respondent was solemnised on 18.12.1984 in accordance with the recognised rites and customs of the Hanafi Muslim school of thought. The appellant in support of her stand filed a copy of the 'nikahnama' as Annexure No. 1 along with the stay application duly supported by an affidavit.

4. There is no dispute of the fact that out of their wedlock, a child was born in the year 1991 but due to some matrimonial dispute the parties preferred staying separately, giving rise to litigation. From the pleadings, it transpires that a case under section 125 Cr.P.C. was filed by the appellant which was registered as Case No. 194/1990 and a case under Section 127 Cr.P.C. was also registered as Case No. 43/1994. Further, a criminal case under Sections 498A, 323, 504, 506 I.P.C. was also filed in the Court of Chief Judicial Magistrate, Jhansi which was registered as Case No. 2454 of 1997 (Haseena Bano versus Ehsan). However, after a lapse of time, a settlement took place between the parties, out of Court and the aforesaid litigation came to an end. It is the admitted case of the parties to the present appeal that they are living separately since 16.07.1990 and on the intervention and persuasion of some respected persons of the society, the parties resorted to put an end to their marital tie and finally on 15.11.1999, they decided to accord divorce on the basis of mutual consent and dissolved their marriage by way of mubara'at as per the established principles under the Muslim Personal Law. Thereafter, on 07.03.2000 the appellant and the respondent reduced the aforesaid divorce in writing by means of a jointly signed notarised document titled as "Talaqnama Tehreer".

5. The parties to this appeal jointly filed a Suit being Declaration Case No.687 of 2021 before the competent Family Court at Jhansi, seeking declaration of their matrimonial status. However, the said Suit was dismissed by the learned Additional Principal Judge, Family Court, Jhansi, vide order dated 10.10.2023, on the ground of default of non-filing of the said 'Talaqnama' in-original by the plaintiffs along with the list of documents submitted in the Suit proceeding and also on the ground of delay in filing the Suit that having being instituted after a lapse of about 20 years from the date of its commencement of the dissolution of marriage.

6. We have heard the learned Counsels for the parties and perused the record.

7. It is submitted by the learned counsel for the appellant that since 16.07.1990, the appellant has been living separately. The divorce between the parties, by way of mutual consent (mubara'at) on 07.03.2000 is undisputed as the same has never been challenged before any court of law. But the authorities at different forum, unnecessarily demands a formal declaration of the said dissolved matrimonial status (divorce) issued from the competent court of law. Having no other option but to approach the court of law for redressal of the said grievance, appellant and the respondent jointly filed a Suit being Declaration Case No. 687 of 2021 before the competent Family Court at Jhansi seeking declaration of the aforesaid duly dissolved marriage. However, the said Suit has been illegally dismissed by the learned Additional Principal Judge, Family Court, Jhansi, vide order dated 10.10.2023.

8. The contention of learned counsel for the appellant is that the learned Court below, although, has neither disbelieved the solemnisation of the marriage between the parties that took place on 18.12.1984 nor their separation since 16.07.1990. The dissolution of marriage by way of mubara'at (divorce by mutual consent) on 15.11.1999 which was reduced in writing in the form of 'Talaqnama Tehreer' on 07.03.2000 is not in dispute; but the learned court below dismissed the said Suit in the most mechanical manner, vide impugned judgement and order dated 10.10.2023 on the unwarranted/technical grounds of non-availability of the 'Talaqnama' in-original on record and the Suit in question having been instituted after a lapse of about 20 years from the date of commencement of the dissolution of marriage.

9. It has also been asserted on behalf of the appellant that the learned Court below did not appreciate the statements of the witnesses who were examined before the Court on 22.11.2021, evidence as placed by the appellant and the factual matrix of the case, in as much as, the fact that the Suit has been jointly filed by the parties seeking declaration of their matrimonial status as 'divorced' where the same is not at all disputed. The next submission advanced by the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant is that since the factum of divorce is not disputed in the instant case and under the Muslim Law, there is no legal mandate of a written divorce (mubara'at) the Talaqnama dated 07.03.2000 in the instant case, is at the best a memorial, further the same is not a disputed document, as such, under the facts of the case there is no requirement of Talaqnama in-original as per Section 54 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, but the learned Court below has dismissed the said Suit without taking into consideration the settled legal position of law. Further, the provisions of the Indian Limitation Act are not attracted in the instant case and the learned court below has misconstrued the law on the subject.

10. The aforesaid facts as narrated on behalf of the appellant-plaintiff have not been disputed by the learned counsel for the respondent.

11. For better appreciation of the case, it would be apt to go through the law on the subject matter i.e. divorce by way of mubara'at as provided under the Muslim Personal law.

12. Under the Mohammadan Law, divorce by mutual consent is called mubara'at; and it may take place as an out-of-court divorce. The word mubara'at is in a linguistic form indicates mutual and joint or common initiative of the parties. The Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) Application Act, 1937 refers to this form of divorce where the parties to a Muslim marriage, may by their joint initiative and mutual consent decide to put an end to the marital tie, either unconditionally or subject to conditions mutually agreed upon. Both the parties, so agreeing to a divorce by mutual consent should be major and sane and both should be acting by their own free will. There is no condition that the marriage should have lasted for a particular duration. The ijab (proposal) for mubara'at may emanates from either party; and the other party's qubul (acceptance) of the same will make the transaction complete. It is pertinent to mention here that mubara'at may be effected orally or by writing and with or without a qazi's intervention. No reason for separation need be mentioned in the oral or written agreement entered into, between the parties, for the said purpose. A mubara'at agreement cannot incorporate any such condition that affects the right of any person than the parties to marriage. For convenience the relevant provision of The Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) Application Act, 1937 is quoted below:

2. Application of Personal Law to Muslims.--Notwithstanding any custom or usage to the contrary, in all questions (save questions relating to agricultural land) regarding intestate succession, special property of females, including personal properly inherited or obtained under contract or gift or any other provision of Personal Law. marriage, dissolution of marriage, including talaq, ila, zihar, lian, khula and mubaraat, maintenance, dower, guardianship, gifts, trusts and trust properties, and wakfs (other than charities and charitable institutions and charitable and religious endowments) the rule of decision in cases where the parties are Muslims shall be the Muslim Personal Law (Shariat).
13. The Hon'ble Supreme Court of India while dealing with the issue of rights of Muslim women regarding the dissolution of marriage, in the case of Shayara Bano versus Union of India, reported in (2017) 9 SCC 1, has been pleased to elaborate the provisions of the Section 2 (ix) of The Dissolution of Muslim Marriages Act, 1939 (Act VIII of 1939) which provides that a woman married under the Muslim Law shall be entitled to obtain a decree for the dissolution of her marriage on the ground which is recognised as valid for the dissolution of marriages under Muslim Law.

For ready reference, the relevant paragraph of the said judgment is quoted hereinafter:

145. A close examination of Section 2, extracted above, leaves no room for any doubt, that custom and usage, as it existed amongst Muslims, were sought to be expressly done away with, to the extent the same were contrary to Muslim Personal Law. Section 2 also mandated, that Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) would be exclusively adopted as "... the rule of decision..." in matters of intestate succession, specIal property of females, including all questions pertaining to "... personal property inherited or obtained under contract or gift or any other provision of "Personal Law", marriage, dissolution of marriage, including talaq, ila, zihar, lian, khula and mubaraat, maintenance, dower, gifts, trusts and trust properties, and wakfs...". Section 3 added to the above list, "... adoption, wills and legacies...", subject to the declaration expressed in Section 3.
....................................

....................................

291. If the Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) Application Act, 1937, had incorporated the manner in which questions regarding intestate succession, special property of females including personal property inherited or obtained under contract or gift or matters such as marriage, dissolution of marriage, including talaq, ila, zihar, lian, khula and mubaraat, maintenance, dower, guardianship, gifts, trusts and trust properties, and wakfs (as in Section 2 thereof), had to be dealt with, as per Muslim Personal Law--"Shariat" according to the petitioners, it would be quite a different matter. All the same, the Shariat Act did not describe how the above questions and subjects had to be dealt with. And, therefore, for settlement of disputes amongst Muslims, it would need to be first determined what the Muslim Personal Law, with reference to the disputation, was. Whatever it was, would in terms of Section 2 of the 1937 Act, constitute "the rule of decision".

14. It is worth mentioning that 'The Dissolution of Muslim Marriages Act, 1939 was enacted to give Muslim women the right to divorce on certain conditions, besides the Muslim Personal Law (Shiariat) Application Act, 1937 was legislated so that specific personal law be made applicable to the Muslims, in certain matters, eliminating the customary usages of localised nature.

15. The Dissolution of Muslim Marriages Act, 1939 assimilates principles of Muslim Personal Law in codified form. It would not be out of place to say that the Holy Quran has provided ample safeguards to women who are commanded to be dealt with fairly on 'equitable terms', when a dispute of some sort arises between husband and wife. It is notable that prior to the coming into force of 'The Dissolution of Muslim Marriages Act, 1939'; Muslim woman had a right to file a Suit before a qazi or a judge, having authority and sanction from the State or governing agency in the area.

16. It is pertinent to flag at this stage that the Family Court, in exercise of its jurisdiction as per Explanation (b) of S.7 of the Family Courts Act, 1984, is duly competent to endorse an extra-judicial divorce and declare matrimonial status of a person. Therefore, in the case of mubara'at, the Family Court is competent to declare 'divorce', on being satisfied that both the parties, so agreeing to dissolve their marital-tie by mutual consent are major and sane are acting by their own free will. The declaration of the matrimonial status of the parties by the Family Court as contemplated under Section 7 of the Family Courts Act, 1984, is a judicial endorsement of even the extra-judicial divorce.

17. The extra-judicial divorce by way of mubara'at is complete, the moment spouses enter into a lawful mutual agreement to put an end to their matrimonial tie. In the case of mubara'at, if the Court is prima-facie satisfied that the parties have duly entered into a mubara'at agreement, it shall endorse the same and declare the status of the parties as divorced by passing an order to that effect as provided under Section 7 of the Family Courts Act, 1984. Needless to observe that it is always open to the parties to challenge the validity of the aforesaid divorce in accordance with law before the competent forum and in the event where the divorce itself is held legally unsustainable by competent authority the declaration endorsing the extra-judicial divorce made under Section 7 of the Family Courts Act, 1984 shall abide the said decision.

18. The said issue has been dealt with in detail by the High Court of Kerala at Ernakulam in the case of Asbi .K.N versus Hashim M.U. reported in 2021 SCC OnLine Ker 3945. For ready reference, paragraphs 4 and 5 of the said judgment is reproduced hereinbelow:

"4. The Division Bench of this Court in X v. Y (2021 (2) KHC 709) has held that the Family Court in exercise of the jurisdiction under Explanation (d) of S.7 of the Act is competent to endorse an extrajudicial divorce to declare the marital status of a person. It was made clear in the said judgment that in the matter of unilateral dissolution of marriage invoking khula and talaq, the scope of enquiry before the Family Court is limited and in such proceedings, the Court shall record the khula or talaq to declare the marital status of the parties after due notice to other party. In the matter of mubaraat, the Family Court shall declare the marital status without further enquiry on being satisfied that the dissolution was effected on mutual consent. It was observed that such matter shall be disposed treating it as uncontested matter without any delay by passing a formal order declaring the marital status. It was further held that if any person wants to contest the effectiveness of khula or talaq, it is open for such person to contest the same in appropriate manner known under the law.
5. The unilateral extrajudicial divorce under Muslim Personal law is complete when either of the spouse pronounce/declare talaq, talaq-e-tafweez or khula, as the case may be, in accordance with Muslim Personal Law. So also extrajudicial divorce by mubaarat mode is complete as and when both spouses enter into mutual agreement. The seal of the Court is not necessary to the validity of any of these modes of extra judicial divorce. The endorsement of extrajudicial divorce and consequential declaration of the status of the parties by the Family Court invoking S.7(d) of the Act is contemplated only to have a public record of the extrajudicial divorce. Hence, detailed enquiry is neither essential nor desirable in a proceeding initiated by either of the parties to endorse an extrajudicial divorce and to declare the marital status. The Family Court has to simply ascertain whether a valid pronouncement/declaration of talaq or khula was made and it was preceded by effective attempt of conciliation. In the case of khula, it has to be further ascertained whether there was an offer by the wife to return the "dower". It could be ascertained by perusal of the recitals in talaq nama/khula nama or its communication (if it is in writing) or by recording the statement of the parties. No further enquiry as in the case of an adversarial litigation like chief examination and cross-examination of the parties are not at all contemplated in such a proceedings. If the Court is prima facie satisfied that there was valid pronouncement of talaq/khula/talaq-e-tafweez, it shall endorse the same and declare the status of the parties. In the case of mubaarat, if the Court is prima facie satisfied that mubaarat agreement has been executed and signed by both parties, it shall endorse the same and declare the status of the parties. The Court shall pass formal order declaring the marital status without any delay. If any of the parties want to challenge the extrajudicial divorce by talaq, khula, mubaarat or talaq-e-tafweez mode, he/she is free to challenge the same in accordance with law in appropriate forum. The declaration granted by the Family Court u/s 7(d) endorsing the extrajudicial divorce shall be subject to the final outcome of such proceedings, if any. We consider it desirable to formulate the following guidelines to be followed by the Family Court in a petition filed u/s 7(d) of the Act to endorse an extrajudicial divorce under Muslim Personal Law and to declare the marital status of the parties to the marriage.
(i) On receipt of the petition, the Family Court shall issue notice to the respondent.
(ii) After service of summons or appearance of the respondent, as the case may be, the Family Court shall formally record the statement of both parties. The parties shall also be directed to produce talaq nama/khula nama (if pronouncement / declaration is in writing) / mubaarat agreement.
(iii) The Family Court shall thereafter on perusal of the recitals in talaq nama/khula nama/ communication of talaq, khula or talaq-e-tafweez (if available) and the statement of the parties, ascertain whether there was valid pronouncement of talaq/khula/talaq-e-tafweez. In the case of mubaarat, the Family Court shall ascertain whether the parties have executed and signed mubaarat agreement.
(iv) On prima facie satisfaction that there was valid pronouncement of talaq, khula, talaq-e-tafweez, as the case may be, or valid execution of mubaarat agreement, the Family Court shall proceed to pass order endorsing the extrajudicial divorce and declaring the status of the parties without any further enquiry.
(v) The enquiry to be conducted by the Family Court shall be summary in nature treating it as an uncontested matter.
(vi) The Family Court shall dispose of the petition within one month of the appearance of the respondent. The period can be extended for valid reasons.
(vii) If any of the parties is unable to appear at the Court personally, the Family Court shall conduct enquiry using video conferencing facility."
19. Now, having dealt with the legal aspect of mubara'at under the Muslim Personal Law, it would be apt to deal with the findings as recorded by the learned Additional Principal Judge, Family Court, Jhansi, vide the impugned judgment and order dated 10.10.2023, regarding the delay in filing the Suit for declaration of the dissolution of marriage. From a bare perusal of The Family Courts Act, 1984, it is abundantly clear that no period of limitation is prescribed for a Suit or proceeding for declaration of matrimonial status of the parties as provided under the Explanation appended to Section 7 of the Family Courts Act, 1984. For convenience, Section 7 of the Family Courts Act, 1984 is quoted below:

"7. Jurisdiction. - (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, a Family Court shall-
(a) have and exercise all the jurisdiction exercisable by any district court or any subordinate civil court under any law for the time being in force in respect of suits and proceedings of the nature referred to in the explanation; and
(b) be deemed, for the purpose of exercising such jurisdiction under such law, to be a district court or, as the case may be, such subordinate civil court for the area to which the jurisdiction of the Family Court extends.
Explanation -- The suits and proceedings referred to in this sub-section are suits and proceedings of the following nature, namely:-

(a) a suit or proceeding between the parties to a marriage for a decree of nullity of marriage (declaring the marriage to be null and void or, as the case may be, annulling the marriage) or restitution of conjugal rights or judicial separation or dissolution of marriage;
(b) a suit or proceeding for a declaration as to the validity of a marriage or as to the matrimonial status of any person;
(c) a suit or proceeding between the parties to a marriage with respect to the property of the parties or of either of them;
(d) a suit or proceeding for an order or injunction in circumstances arising out of a marital relationship;
(e) a suit or proceeding for a declaration as to the legitimacy of any person;
(f) a suit or proceeding for maintenance;
(g) a suit or proceeding in relation to the guardianship of the person or the custody of, or access to, any minor.
(2) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, a Family Court shall also have and exercise-
(a) the jurisdiction exercisable by a Magistrate of First Class under Chapter IX (relating to order for maintenance of wife, children and parents) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974); and
(b) such other jurisdiction as may be conferred on it by any other enactment."
20. Looking into the factual matrix of the case, this Court is of the view that when the dissolution of marriage between the parties by way of mubara'at to put an end to their marital tie, by mutually agreeing on their own free will is not in dispute; the appellant and the respondent were duly examined by the learned Trial Court on 22.11.2021 as Witnesses (PW-1 & PW-2) wherein they admitted the dissolution of their marriage as well as the execution of a jointly signed notarised "Talaqnama Tehreer" dated 07.03.2000, the finding recorded by the learned Additional Principal Judge, Family Court, Jhansi to the effect that the said 'Talaqnama' in-original has not been filed by the appellant-plaintiff along with the list of documents, is totally unwarranted, and not sustainable in the light of Section 58 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, which provides as under:

"58. Facts admitted need not be proved- No fact need not be proved in any proceeding which the parties thereto or their agents agree to admit at the hearing, or which, before the hearing, they agree to admit by any writing under their hands, or which by any rule of pleading in force at the time they are deemed to have admitted by their pleadings.
Provided that the Court may, in its discretion, require the facts admitted to be proved otherwise than by such admissions."
21. Here it is also relevant to mention that the 'Talaqnama Tehreer' dated 07.03.2000 in-original has been filed by the appellant as additional evidence before this Court through an application dated 27.05.2023, which has been allowed vide order dated 29.05.2024, as the same has not been disputed by the respondent.

22. Now, coming to the other finding returned by the learned Additional Principal Judge, Family Court Jhansi, leading to the dismissal of the Suit that the Suit in question is barred by limitation as the same was instituted after a lapse of about 20 years from the date of commencement of the dissolution of marriage is concerned, it would be apposite to quote the relevant portion of the impugned judgement and order dated 10.10.2023, which are reproduced as under:

^^3- ;kphx.k us viuk viuk 'kiFk i= izLrqr dj dFku fd;k fd e/; rykd gks pqdh gSA ;g okfn;k la0 1 dks 1]10]035@- :- izkIr gks pqds gS vc muds e/; fdlh izdkj dk ysu nsu 'ks"k ugha gSA 4- ;kphx.k ds c;ku vafdr fd, x, ,oa mUgsa lquk x;kA 5- ?kks"k.kkRed okn rFkk ;kphx.k ds }kjk 'kiFki= o ekSf[kd lk{; ij fd;s x;s dFku ds voyksdu ls ;g fofnr gksrk gS fd ;kphx.k dk fookg eqfLye jhfr fjokt ds vuqlkj fnukad 18-12-1984 dks lEiUu gqvk FkkA ;kphx.k fnukad 16-07-1990 ls vyx vyx jg jgs gSA ;kphx.k ds e/; vc dksbZ ysu nsu cdk;k ugha gSA ftjg esa Hkh ih-MCyw&1] ih-MCY;w-&2 us dgk gS fd ;kphx.k ds e/; fnukad 07-03-2000 dks eqfLye jhfr fjokt ds vuqlkj rykd gks x;h ftlds laca/k esa ;kphx.k us rykd ukek rgjhj dh Nk;kizfr izLrqr dh gS tks u lwph ls nkf[ky gS vkSj u gh izekf.kr gSaA rykd ukesa dh Nk;k izfr bl Lrj ij xzkg; ugh gSA ;kphx.k ds vuqlkj mHk;i{k dk fnukad 7-3-2000 dks rykd gks pqdk gSA rFkk mlh fnu rgjhj ukek cuok fy;k x;kA mDr mn~?kks"k.kkRed okn fnukad 24-08-2021 dks rykd gksus dh frfFk ls yxHkx 20 o"kZ ckn lafLFkr fd;k x;k gS tks ifjlhek vf/kfu;e 1963 ls ckf/kr gSA vr% mDr okn ifjlhek fof/k ls ckf/kr o vfHkizekf.kr lk{; u gksus ds dkj.k Lohdkj fd, tkus ;ksX; ugha gSA vkns'k ;kphx.k }kjk izLrqr ?kks"k.kkRed okn fujLr fd;k tkrk gSA i=koyh fu;ekuqlkj nkf[ky n¶rj gksA"
23. The aforesaid finding regarding the delay in seeking the relief of declaration, leading to the dismissal of Suit is unsustainable in view of the fact that the Suit was instituted on the joint initiative of the appellant and the respondent, wherein it is the admitted case of the appellant as well as the respondent that they are living separately since 16.07.1990 and there survives no conjugal relationship between them. They decided to dissolve their marriage on 15.11.1999, with their mutual consent, by way of mubara'at as per the Muslim Personal Law. Thereafter, on 07.03.2000, the appellant and the respondent executed a jointly signed notarised document as "Talaqnama Tehreer".

24. The Explanation appended to the Section 7 of The Family Courts Act, 1984 bestows jurisdiction upon the concerned Family Court to entertain the suit or proceeding for declaration as to the validity of a marriage or as to the matrimonial status of person concerned. The Family court Act, 1984 does not prescribe any period of Limitation in respect of the suit or proceeding for declaration of the matrimonial status of the parties. Further, Section 29(3) of the Limitation Act, 1963 very categorically stipulates that 'save as otherwise provided in any law for the time being in force with respect to marriage and divorce, nothing in this Act shall apply to any suit or other proceeding under any such law'. For ready reference Section 29 of the Limitation Act, 1963 is quoted below:

"29- Savings.-(1) Nothing in this Act shall affect section 25 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 (9 of 1872).
(2) Where any special or local law prescribes for any suit, appeal or application a period of limitation different from the period prescribed by the Schedule, the provisions of section 3 shall apply as if such period were the period prescribed by the Schedule and for the purpose of determining any period of limitation prescribed for any suit, appeal or application by any special or local law, the provisions contained in sections 4 to 24 (inclusive) shall apply only in so far as, and to the extent to which, they are not expressly excluded by such special or local law.
(3) Save as otherwise provided in any law for the time being in force with respect to marriage and divorce, nothing in this Act shall apply to any suit or other proceeding under any such law.
(4) Sections 25 and 26 and the definition of "easement" in section 2 shall not apply to cases arising in the territories to which the Indian Easements Act, 1882(5of 1882(, may for the time being extend."
25. The present case being a claim for declaration of matrimonial status of the parties as 'divorced' is undisputed, it is a well settled law that where the legal status of the parties is a continuing course of event, a continuing and recurring cause of action accrues each day. As has been addressed in the preceding paragraphs the declaration of the matrimonial status of the parties by the Family Court as contemplated under Section 7 of the Family Courts Act, 1984, is a judicial endorsement of the extra-judicial divorce. In the case of mubara'at, if the Court is prima-facie satisfied that the parties with their free will have duly entered a mubara'at agreement, it shall endorse the same and declare the divorced status of the parties by passing an appropriate order to that effect. Such a proceeding is not akin to the adversarial litigation. The claim for the declaration of the parties' marital-status, strikes at the very core of society and if such an undisputed declaratory claim is elongated and haunted by the technical ground of delay, the aim, object and the very spirit of the said welfare legislation shall be adversely sacrificed. It is settled principle of law that when substantial justice and technical consideration are pitted against each other, the substantial justice shall prevail over the technical consideration. However, it goes without saying that the courts are not to take a liberal approach in condonation of delay in the absence of sufficient cause. In any case, it would be unnecessary to delve into this debate any further in the light of the categorical provision as stipulated under Section 29(3) of the Limitation Act, 1963 that deals with the extent of applicability of Limitation Act to any suit or proceeding under any law with respect to marriage and divorce. Accordingly, in view of the deliberations made herein above it is apparent that in view of the express restriction as contemplated under the said Section 29(3) no provision of The Limitation Act, 1963 shall come in the way to put any bar in respect of the suit or proceeding for declaration of matrimonial status as provided under Section 7 of the Family Courts Act, 1984.

26. It would be appropriate at this stage to note that the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Ajaib Singh versus The Sirhind Co-Operative Marketing Cum-Processing Service Society Limited and Others, reported in (1999) 6 SCC 82, has been pleased to observe that,  "11... It is not the function of the court to prescribe the limitation where the Legislature in its wisdom had thought it fit not to prescribe any period. The courts admittedly interpret law and do not make laws. Personal views of the Judges presiding the court cannot be stretched to authorise them to interpret law in such a manner which would amount to legislation intentionally left over by the Legislature..."

The High Court of Bombay (Nagpur Bench) in the case of Skh. Hafiz Skh. Habib versus State of Maharashtra, reported in 2009 (1) AIR Bom R 345, has held as under:

"26. If the law intends not to prescribe limitation, it means so, and this omission will have to be respected as conscious omission and there are no grounds coming forward permitting to fill in the alleged omission taking shelter of Article 137 of the Limitation Act. The law of Limitation has no application to the right of a Muslim Woman filing an application u/s. 3(1)(a) of the Muslim Women (Protection of Rights on Divorce) Act, 1986, it being a right of recurring nature, and bar of limitation is not laid down.
27. In these premises, this Court holds that the Law of Limitation has no application to the right of a Muslim woman filing an application under Section 3(1)(a) of the Muslim Women (Protection of Rights on Divorce) Act, 1986, it being a right of recurring nature, and bar of limitation is not laid down."
27. Having come to the conclusion that The Family Courts Act, 1984 does not prescribe any specific limitation for filing a suit or proceeding for declaration as to the matrimonial status of any person, it would be apt to consider whether the length of delay as noticed by the learned Court below, in filing the Suit in question could be a valid ground for rejection of the same.

28. On the question as to whether in the absence of an expressly prescribed limitation under the Statute, can a suit or proceeding be entertained, irrespective of any passage of time? The Hon'ble Supreme Court dealing with such a situation has held that in the absence of a prescribed statutory limitation, approaching the court, is to be done within 'reasonable time'. There is a catena of judgments where the Hon'ble Supreme Court has been pleased to hold that where the concerned Statute does not prescribe the limitation, the rights conferred therein must be exercised within a 'reasonable time'. The issue of no express limitation being provided under the statute has captured the attention of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of State of Punjab and others versus Bhatinda District Cooperative Milk Producers Union, reported in (2007) 11 SCC 363, wherein the Hon'ble Apex Court has been pleased to observe as under:

"18. It is trite that if no period of limitation has been prescribed, statutory authority must exercise its jurisdiction within a reasonable period. What, however, shall be the reasonable period would depend upon the nature of the statute, rights and liabilities thereunder and other relevant factors."
29. For the purpose of determination of time period to be the 'reasonable period' the Hon'ble Apex Court has provided the yard stick, in the case of M/S North Eastern Chemicals Industries (P) Ltd. and another versus M/S Ashok Paper Mill (Assam) Ltd. and another, reported in AIR 2024 Supreme Court 436, wherein the Hon'ble Supreme Court has been pleased to hold that in the absence of a particular period of time being prescribed under the statute, the same would be governed by the principle of 'reasonable time', for which, by virtue of its very nature, no straitjacket formula can be laid down and it is to be determined as per case and circumstances of each case. The parameter for determining the 'reasonable time' in a particular case has been laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the following manner:

"In light of above discussion, it is clear that when a Court is seized of a situation where no limitation stands provided either by specific applicability of the Limitation Act or the special statute governing the dispute, the Court must undertake a holistic assessment of the facts and circumstances of the case to examine the possibility of delay causing prejudice to a party. When no limitation stands prescribed it would be inappropriate for a Court to supplant the legislature's wisdom by its own and provide a limitation, more so in accordance with what it believes to be the appropriate period. A court should, in such a situation consider in the facts and circumstances of the case at hand, the conduct of the parties, the nature of the proceeding, the length of delay, the possibility of prejudice being caused, and the scheme of the statute in question. It may be underscored here that when a party to a dispute raises a plea of delay despite no specific period being prescribed in the statute, such a party also bears the burden of demonstrating how the delay in itself would cause the party additional prejudice or loss as opposed to, the claim subject matter of dispute, being raised at an earlier point in time." (emphasis supplied by us)
30. In the present case, having regard to the factual matrix of the case, as taken note of above, the parties to the suit cannot be said to have transgressed the boundaries of reasonable time in approaching the learned Family Court having jurisdiction by jointly filing the suit for declaration as to their matrimonial status, for the obvious reason that the parties by way of mubara'at put an end to their marital-tie by mutually agreeing on their own free will, all the more the factum of divorce in the instant case is not in dispute giving rise to the cause of action being of recurring nature. Thus, the prayer sought for by the parties by jointly filing the Suit for declaration of their matrimonial status as divorced ought to have been granted by the learned Family Court. The finding recorded by the learned Additional Principal Judge, Family Court, Jhansi that Suit in question is barred by limitation having being instituted after a lapse of about 20 years from the date of commencement of the dissolution of marital-tie, is unsustainable in the eyes of law, in the teeth of the categorical provision as stipulated under Section 29(3) of the Limitation Act, 1963 and also not being in consonance with the parameters laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India, as narrated in the preceding paragraphs, regarding the assessment of the reasonableness of the length of delay, if any. Accordingly, the order of dismissal of the Suit dated 10.10.2023 based upon the unwarranted findings recorded in the impugned judgment is liable to be set-aside.

Order

1. The appeal is allowed. The impugned judgment and order dated 10.10.2023 and the decree dated 19.10.2023 passed by the Additional Principal Judge, Family Court, Jhansi in Declaration Case No.687 of 2021, are hereby set-aside. The Suit for declaration of the matrimonial status is decreed. Accordingly, the matrimonial status of the parties is hereby declared as 'divorced'.

2. However, the parties to bear respective cost.

3. Since this appeal has been decided with the mutual consent of the parties, hence no useful purpose would be served to retain the original 'Talaqnama Tehreer' dated 07.03.2000 on record. Accordingly, the Registry is directed to return the same in-original to the appellant after retaining a photocopy of the same on record, in accordance with the Rules.

4. The Registry is further directed to return the lower court record to the court concerned.

Order Date :- 12.9.2024 Abhishek Gupta    
================================================================================


################################################################################
                      CATEGORY 6: EMPLOYMENT LAW
                              (5 CASES)
################################################################################

================================================================================
CASE 26: Rajiv Kumar vs Tech Corp India Ltd
================================================================================
Court: Labour Court, Bangalore
Date: 18-July-2021

Employee with 10 years clean record suddenly terminated without notice or inquiry. Company alleged "misconduct" but provided no details or evidence. Employee claimed retaliation for filing safety complaints. Industrial Disputes Act requires notice, opportunity to defend, and proper inquiry before termination. None followed. Timing after complaints raised inference of retaliation.

Judgment: Termination set aside as illegal. Employee reinstated with Rs. 8 lakhs back wages for 2 years unemployment plus Rs. 2 lakhs compensation.

Key Principle: Termination without following statutory procedure is illegal. Employee entitled to reinstatement.
================================================================================


================================================================================
CASE 27:
[Cites 34, Cited by 0]
Allahabad High Court
Shashi Kant Tiwari vs High Court Of Judicature At Allahabad ... on 23 April, 2024
Author: Vivek Kumar Birla
Bench: Vivek Kumar Birla




HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
 
 



 
AFR
 
Neutral Citation No. - 2024:AHC:71093-DB
 
RESERVED ON 28.2.2024
 
DELIVERED ON  23.4.2024
 
In Chamber
 

 
Case :- WRIT - A No. - 12307 of 2019
 
Petitioner :- Shashi Kant Tiwari
 
Respondent :- High Court Of Judicature At Allahabad And 2 Others
 
Counsel for Petitioner :- Sushil Kumar Shukla,Shashi Kant Shukla
 
Counsel for Respondent :- Ashish Mishra
 

 
Hon'ble Vivek Kumar Birla,J.
 
Hon'ble Donadi Ramesh,J.

(Delivered by Vivek Kumar Birla,J.)

1. Heard Sri Shashi Kant Shukla along with Sri Sushil Kumar Shukla, learned counsel for the petitioner and Sri Ashish Mishra, learned counsel appearing for the respondents-High Court.

2. Present petition has been filed with the following prayers:-

"I. Issue a writ order of direction in the nature of certiorari to quash the impugned order dated 08.05.2019 vide Memo No. 232/S & A Cell/2-019 passed by respondent no. 2 Registrar (J) Selection and Appointment/Seniority High Court of Judicature at Allahabad.
II. Issue a writ order of direction in the nature of mandamus commanding and directing the respondents to declare the result of the petitioner as finally selected candidate in Uttar Pradesh Higher Judicial Service Examination 2016 bearing roll No. 6242.
III. Issue a writ order of direction in the nature of mandamus commanding the respondents to issue the appointment letter to the petitioner as finally selected candidate in Uttar Pradesh Higher Judicial Service Examination 2016 bearing roll No. 6242."
3. As stated, the case of the petitioner is that the petitioner is a practising lawyer and was registered as an Advocate on 16.11.1998 in Bar Council of Uttar Pradesh. He was appointed as Law Officer on 15.1.2009 in a company with the name and style of Alliance Builders and Contractors Limited, Bareilly (hereinafter referred as the Company). It is alleged that he was representing on behalf of the Company in different courts of law, a copy of the appointment letter dated 15.1.2009 has been annexed as Annexure-3 to the writ petition. It is the case of the petitioner that he was simultaneously also appearing for private clients and had filed several Vakalatnamas on behalf of other litigants as well in various courts of law during the year 2009-10. He appeared in U.P. Higher Judicial Services Examination, 2009 and in the Form the fact regarding his legal services to the abovenoted Company has been mentioned. He was qualified the prelims as well as the written examination and was called for interview but he was not permitted to participate in the interview on the ground that he is a salary paid employee. As he intended to appear in Higher Judicial Services Examination, therefore, he moved an application dated 1.1.2010 before the Managing Director of the Company tendering his resignation, copy whereof has been annexed as Annexure-14 to the writ petition. The resignation of the petitioner was accepted by the Company and relieving order was passed on 1.2.2010. Subsequently, the petitioner appeared in U.P. Higher Judicial Services Examination, 2012 and was again successful in prelims as well as in the written examination and was called for interview, however, as he has obtained only 21 marks out of 100 marks, therefore, his name did not figure in the select list. He again appeared in U.P. Higher Judicial Services Examination, 2014 but could not qualify the written examination. The petitioner again applied in April 2016 for U.P. Higher Judicial Services Examination, 2016 against 72 vacancies so advertised. He filled up the Form on 6.6.2016 (Annexure-19 to the writ petition), however, it is claimed that due to inadvertent mistake some facts were wrongly mentioned by the petitioner in the form and the said facts were clarified by filing affidavit dated 12.6.2016 (Annexure-20 to the writ petition). The petitioner again cleared prelims as well as written examination in the aforesaid examination and was called for interview on 22.4.2017, the final result whereof was declared on 18.8.2017, however, name of the petitioner did not figure in the final select list. It is asserted that when marks of the candidate were uploaded on 19.4.2019 the petitioner came to know that he has obtained total 471 marks while lastly selected candidate of the general category, namely, Anchal Lavania has obtained only 455 marks, then the petitioner was surprised that he had obtained 16 marks more than last final selected candidate of the general category, why his name has not been placed in the final selected list, therefore, he moved a representation dated 3.5.2019, the same was rejected by the impugned order dated 8.5.2019 (Annexure-25 to the writ petition).

4. The rejection order is being challenged by learned counsel for the petitioner mainly on the ground that since 16.11.1998, the date on which he was registered as an Advocate with the Bar Council of Uttar Pradesh, the petitioner was a regular practitioner as an Advocate in various courts of law specifically in Civil Court, Bareilly. It is submitted that although the petitioner was engaged for the Company for one year, however, his nature of job was to represent the cases of the company as an Advocate before various courts of law, therefore, he had always been working as an Advocate and that the nature of work performed by the petitioner for the Company was purely advocacy. It is submitted that the petitioner appeared in U.P. Higher Judicial Services Examinations in 2009, 2012, 2014 and 2016 and always Bar Association concerned had issued experience certificate countersigned by the District Judge to the effect that he was a regular practitioner as an Advocate, therefore, the ground of rejection that he was engaged in full time employment as Law Officer of the Company and thus, did not fulfill the necessary eligibility criteria of having seven year continuous practice as on 18.6.2016 i.e. the last date of filling up the Form, is not sustainable in the eyes of law.

5. In support of his arguments, learned counsel for the petitioner has heavily placed reliance on the judgment of Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Deepak Aggarwal vs. Keshav Kaushik and others (2013) 5 SCC 277.

6. Learned counsel for the respondent High Court has vehemently opposed the petition. A detailed counter affidavit has been filed by the respondents-High Court disputing the correctness of the arguments of learned counsel for the petitioner specifically highlighting the contents of the appointment letter, resignation letter, the Form filled up by the petitioner and the Affidavit filed by the petitioner. It would be appropriate to extract relevant paragraphs of the Counter Affidavit, which are as under:-

"4. That as per the admitted case of the petitioner, the petitioner was under full time employment of Alliance Builder and Contractors Limited from 15.01.2009. The appointment letter which is annexed to the writ petition (as Annexure 3) contains the detailed terms and conditions of employment, one of the conditions of employment contained at Clause 10 of the said appointment letter reads as follows:
10. This appointment is on a full-time basis and you shall devote your full-time to the duties assigned by the company and will not engage yourself for any other person, firm or company in any capacity during your employment with us.
5. That said appointment letter and its terms and conditions were duly accepted by the petitioner vide his endorsement dated 15/01/2009. It is pertinent to mention here that the petitioner was fully aware of the scope of his employment and the fact that in continuance of his employment the petitioner cannot be considered to be an Advocate with continuing practice for the purpose of his candidature in the U.P. Direct Higher Judicial Services exams which are conducted by the High Court, as such the petitioner himself in his resignation letter dated 01/01/2010 (Annexure 14) specifically stated as follows:-
"मैं शशिकान्त तिवारी आपकी प्रतिष्ठित कंपनी एलायंस बिल्डर्स एंड कॉन्ट्रैक्टर्स लि. में दिनांक 15 जनवरी 2009 से लॉ आफिसर पद पर पूर्णकालिक नियोजन में नियुक्त हूँ।
कंपनी द्वारा दिए गए नियुक्ति पत्र में वर्णित शर्त के अनुसार चूँकि मेरा नियोजन पूर्णकालिक था अतः इस कारण मैं साक्षात्कार देने से वंचित रह गया।
चूँकि मुझे भविष्य में पुनः उच्चतर न्यायिक सेवाओं में सम्मिलित होना है जिसके कारण मैं कंपनी में लॉ ऑफिसर पद के पूर्णकालिक नियोजन में कार्य कर पाने में असर्थ हूँ।
अतः श्रीमान जी से अनुरोध है कि उपरोक्त परस्थिति को देखते हूए मेरा त्यागपत्र स्वीकार कर मुझे मेरे लॉ ऑफिसर पद के पूर्णकालिक नियोजन से कार्य मुक्त करने की कृपा करें।"
As such it is submitted that even as per the understanding of the petitioner, the petitioner's employment was full time and due to his employment he was not eligible for candidature in the Direct HJS exams which were being conducted by the High Court. The petitioner's resignation was accepted on 01/02/2010 on which date he was released from service.

6. That it is further submitted that the present writ petition relates to the cancellation of candidature of the petitioner with respect to the advertisement of the year 2016; as per the admitted case of the petitioner, the petitioner has after filling of the online form, submitted an affidavit with respect to certain inadvertent error in filling the form. The contents of the affidavit itself reveal that the petitioner's stand was that during his full time employment the petitioner was ineligible for appearing in the Direct Higher Judicial Services exam. It is further submitted that the petitioner has not provided any evidence or even stated in his affidavit that he was permitted to practice or was actually practising during the period in which he was under employment. For convenience the relevant part of the affidavit of the petitioner dated 12.06.2016 (Annexure 20) to the writ petition, is reproduced herein under:

"4. यह कि शपथकर्ता का वर्तमान समय में कोई नियोजन नहीं है।
5. यह कि पूर्व में शपथकर्ता ने एक प्राइवेट कंपनी- एलाइंस बिल्डर्स एंड कॉन्ट्रैक्टर्स लिमिटेड स्टेडियम रोड बरैली में लॉ ऑफिसर के रूप में दिनांक 15.01.2009 से 01.02.2010 तक कार्य किया था तथा भविष्य में HJS परीक्षाओं में सम्मिलित होने के कारण त्यागपत्र दे दिया था। शपथकर्ता का नियोजन प्राइवेट था तथा उसे रूपये 9000/- मासिक वेतन मिलता था।"
7. That it is further submitted that no averment or evidence was provided by the petitioner that the petitioner during his course of employment was employed to act and plead in the Court of law as an advocate; no averment was made or evidence was provided by the petitioner that he continued to practice law even after his appointment. On the other hand it was categorically stated in the affidavit that the petitioner was in full term private employment and for the purposes of him becoming eligible for appearing in Direct HJS examinations in the future, he has tendered his resignation on 01.02.2010."

(emphasis supplied)

7. Paragraph 8 of the Counter Affidavit containing the resolution passed by the Selection and Appointment Committee, while rejecting the candidature of the petitioner in its meeting dated 17.5.2017, is also quoted as under:-

"8. That the Hon'ble Selection and Appointment Committee while rejecting his candidature, in its meeting held on 17.05.2017 has resolved as under:

3. Shashi Kant Tiwari (Roll No. 6242):
The candidate vide affidavit dated 13/06/2016 had submitted that he was in employment as Law Officer in a private firm, Alliance Builders and Contractors Ltd. Stadium Road, Bareilly from 15/01/2009 to 01/02/2010. However, he had also submitted an application dated 13/06/2016 in which he had submitted that he had inadvertently filled NO in column number 15 of the application, form which seeks information regarding employment.
Further, the candidate had enclosed an appointment letter issued by the firm Alliance Builders and Contractors Ltd. Stadium Road, Bareilly dated 15/01/2009 offering him appointment as Law Officer at their corporate office disclosing therein that his remuneration will be ₹ 9000 per month.
At point number 10 of the said appointment letter, it is specified that:
"This appointment is on a full-time basis and you shall devote your full-time to the duties assigned by the company and will not engage yourself for any other person, firm or company in any capacity during your employment with us."
The candidate had also submitted relieving order dated 01.02.2010 accepting his resignation from the service and thereby relieving him from duties with effect from 01.02.2010. Sri. Tiwari had disclosed the same facts again through his affidavit dated 03/04/2017. Nothing was found on record to show that he was otherwise practicing as a lawyer in this period, though the candidate had submitted an experierice certificate issued by the District Judge, Bareilly showing his practice as on 18/06/2016 as 17 years 7 months and 2 days [since 16.11.1998].
A perusal of the affidavit submitted by Sri. Shashi Kant Tiwari, Roll No. 6242 with regard to his employment revealed that he was in service during the period from 15/01/2009 to 01/02/2010, which caused discontinuity in his practice. As per the instructions issued for the candidates, only APO/APP were permitted to fill up the application form pursuant to the order passed by the Apex Court in Deepak Agarwal Vs Keshav Kaushik & Others (2013) 5 SCC 277 and in Special Leave Petition No. 17201-17212 of 2007 High Court of Judicature At Allahabad Vs Sanjay Agarwal and Anr.
The last date of submission of online application form was 18/06/2016, therefore the length of continuous practice of Shri Shashi Kant Tiwari on 18/06/2016 [from 01/02/2010] was found to be 6 years 4 months and 17 days and thus, he did not fulfill the necessary eligibility criteria of having 7 years continuous practice as on 18.06.2016.
Therefore in view of the above deliberation, the Committee resolved to treat him ineligible for direct recruitment of U.P.H.J.S.-2016 rejected the provisional candidature of Sri. Shashi Kant Tiwari, Roll No. 6242.
The aforesaid resolution of the Hon'ble Committee was approved by the Hon'ble Full Court and thereafter, the final result of U.P. Higher Judicial Service Recruitment, 2016 was declared on 18.06.2017."
(emphasis supplied)
8. It is next submitted that, therefore, Deepak Aggarwal (supra) is of no help to the petitioner.
9. Reliance has been placed by learned counsel for the respondents to a recent decision of Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Dheeraj Mor vs. High Court of Delhi (2020) 7 SCC 401. Reliance has also been placed to a judgment of Division Bench of this Court dated 20.4.2023 passed in Writ A No. 33829 of 2015 (Kumar Mitakshar vs. State of U.P. and others), wherein the decision of Hon'ble Apex Court passed in Deepak Aggarwal (supra) as well as Dheeraj Mor (supra) has extensively been considered and claim of the similarly placed candidate was rejected.
10. We have considered the rival submissions and have perused the record.
11. Before proceeding further it would be appropriate to take note of relevant provisions of Constitution of India, definition of 'Advocate' as defined in Advocates Act, 1961, relevant rules of Bar Council of India Rules and U.P. Higher Judicial Service Rules, 1975, which are quoted as under:-
"Constitution of India "233(2)- A person not already in the service of the Union or of the State shall only be eligible to be appointed a district judge if he has been for not less than seven years an Advocate or a pleader and is recommended by the High Court for appointment."
The Advocates Act, 1961 "2. Definitions - (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires-

(a) "advocate" means an advocate entered in any roll under the provisions of this Act;
49- General power of the Bar Council of India to make rules- (1) The Bar Council of India may make rules for discharging its functions under this Act, and, in particular, such rules may prescribe-

...

(c) the standards of professional conduct and etiquette to be observed by advocates;

......."

The Bar Council of India Rules "43. An advocate who has been convicted of an offence mentioned under section 24A of the Advocates Act or has been declared insolvent or has taken full time service or part time service or engages in business or any avocation inconsistent with his practising as an advocate or has incurred any disqualification mentioned in the Advocates Act or the rules made thereunder, shall send a declaration to that effect to the respective State Bar Council in which the advocate is enrolled, within ninety days from the date of such disqualification. If the advocate does not file the said declaration or fails to show sufficient cause for not filing such declaration provided therefor, the Committee constituted by the State Bar Council under rule 42 may pass orders suspending the right of the advocate to practise.

Provided that it shall be open to the Committee to condone the delay on an application being made in this behalf.

Provided further that an advocate who had after the date of his enrolment and before the coming into force of this rule, become subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in this rule, shall within a period of ninety days of the coming into force of this rule send declaration referred to in this rule to the respective Bar Council in which the Advocate is enrolled and on failure to do so by such advocate all the provisions of this rule would apply.

49. An advocate shall not be a full-time salaried employee of any person, government, firm, corporation or concern, so long as he continues to practise, and shall, on taking up any such employment, intimate the fact to the Bar Council on whose role his name appears and shall thereupon cease to practise as an advocate so long as he continues in such employment.

RESOLVED and further clarified that as Supreme Court has struck down the appearance by Law Officers in Court even on behalf of their employers the Judgment will operate in the case of all law officers. Even if they were allowed to appear on behalf of their employers all such Law Officers who are till now appearing on behalf of their employers shall not be allowed to appear as advocates. The State Bar Council should also ensure that those Law Officers who have been allowed to practise on behalf of their employers will cease to practise. It is made clear that those Law Officers who after joining services obtained enrolment by reason of the enabling provision cannot practise even on behalf their employers.

RESOLVED that the Bar Council of India is of the view that if the said officer is a whole time employee drawing regular salary, he will not be entitled to be enrolled as an advocate. If the terms of employment show that he is not in full time employment he can be enrolled."

The Uttar Pradesh Higher Judicial Service Rules, 1975 "5. Sources of Recruitment- The recruitment to the service shall be made-

(a) by promotion from amongst the Civil Judges (Senior Division) on the basis of Principle of merit-cum-seniority and passing a suitability test.

(b) by strictly on the basis of merit through limited competitive examination of Civil Judges (Senior Division) having not less than five years qualifying service;

(c) By direct recruitment from amongst the Advocates who have been, for not less than seven years, practicing as an Advocate, as on the last date fixed for the submission of application forms." (emphasis supplied)

12. It would be appropriate to take note of paragraphs 57, 58, 59, 99 and 102 of Deepak Aggarwal (supra) relied on by learned counsel for the petitioner, which are quoted as under:-

"57. In Sushma Suri, a three-Judge Bench of this Court considered the meaning of the expression "advocate" occurring in Article 233 (2) of the Constitution and unamended Rule 49 of the BCI Rules. In paragraph 6 of the Report (Pg. 335) this Court held as under :
"6. If a person on being enrolled as an advocate ceases to practise law and takes up an employment, such a person can by no stretch of imagination be termed as an advocate. However, if a person who is on the rolls of any Bar Council is engaged either by employment or otherwise of the Union or the State or any corporate body or person practises before a court as an advocate for and on behalf of such Government, corporation or authority or person, the question is whether such a person also answers the description of an advocate under the Act. That is the precise question arising for our consideration in this case."
58. Then in paragraph 8 of the Report, this Court observed that for the purposes of the 1961 Act and the BCI Rules, a law officer (Public Prosecutor or Government Pleader) would continue to be an advocate. Not accepting the view of Delhi High Court in Oma Shanker Sharma v. Delhi Administration case (C.W.P. No. 1961 of 1987), this Court having regard to the object of recruitment under Article 233(2) held in paragraph 9:

"9. .........To restrict it to advocates who are not engaged in the manner stated by us earlier in this order is too narrow a view, for the object of recruitment is to get persons of necessary qualification, experience and knowledge of life. A Government Counsel may be a Public Prosecutor or Government Advocate or a Government Pleader. He too gets experience in handling various types of cases apart from dealing with the officers of the Government. Experience gained by such persons who fall in this description cannot be stated to be irrelevant nor detrimental to selection to the posts of the Higher Judicial Service. The expression "members of the Bar" in the relevant Rule would only mean that particular class of persons who are actually practising in courts of law as pleaders or advocates. In a very general sense an advocate is a person who acts or pleads for another in a court and if a Public Prosecutor or a Government Counsel is on the rolls of the Bar Council and is entitled to practise under the Act, he answers the description of an advocate."
59. With regard to unamended Rule 49 of the BCI Rules, this Court held as under :

"10. Under Rule 49 of the Bar Council of India Rules, an advocate shall not be a full-time employee of any person, Government, firm, corporation or concern and on taking up such employment, shall intimate such fact to the Bar Council concerned and shall cease to practise as long as he is in such employment. However, an exception is made in such cases of law officers of the Government and corporate bodies despite his being a full-time salaried employee if such law officer is required to act or plead in court on behalf of others. It is only to those who fall into other categories of employment that the bar under Rule 49 would apply. An advocate employed by the Government or a body corporate as its law officer even on terms of payment of salary would not cease to be an advocate in terms of Rule 49 if the condition is that such advocate is required to act or plead in courts on behalf of the employer. The test, therefore, is not whether such person is engaged on terms of salary or by payment of remuneration, but whether he is engaged to act or plead on its behalf in a court of law as an advocate. In that event the terms of engagement will not matter at all. What is of essence is as to what such law officer engaged by the Government does -- whether he acts or pleads in court on behalf of his employer or otherwise. If he is not acting or pleading on behalf of his employer, then he ceases to be an advocate. If the terms of engagement are such that he does not have to act or plead, but does other kinds of work, then he becomes a mere employee of the Government or the body corporate. Therefore, the Bar Council of India has understood the expression "advocate" as one who is actually practising before courts which expression would include even those who are law officers appointed as such by the Government or body corporate.
99. What we have said above gets fortified by Rule 43 of the BCI Rules. Rule 43 provides that an advocate, who has taken a full-time service or part-time service inconsistent with his practising as an advocate, shall send a declaration to that effect to the respective State Bar Council within time specified therein and any default in that regard may entail suspension of the right to practice. In other words, if full-time service or part-time service taken by an advocate is consistent with his practising as an advocate, no such declaration is necessary. The factum of employment is not material but the key aspect is whether such employment is consistent with his practising as an advocate or, in other words, whether pursuant to such employment, he continues to act and/or plead in the courts. If the answer is yes, then despite employment he continues to be an advocate. On the other hand, if the answer is in negative, he ceases to be an advocate.
102. As regards construction of the expression, "if he has been for not less than seven years an advocate" in Article 233(2) of the Constitution, we think Mr. Prashant Bhushan was right in his submission that this expression means seven years as an advocate immediately preceding the application and not seven years any time in the past. This is clear by use of 'has been'. The present perfect continuous tense is used for a position which began at some time in the past and is still continuing. Therefore, one of the essential requirements articulated by the above expression in Article 233(2) is that such person must with requisite period be continuing as an advocate on the date of application."
13. It would also be relevant to take note of Dheeraj Mor (supra) as relied on by learned counsel for the respondent-High Court, relevant paragraphs whereof are quoted as under:-

"13. Article 233(2) starts with a negative stipulation that a person who is not already in the service of the Union or the State, shall be eligible only to be appointed as District Judge if he has been an advocate or a pleader for not less than 7 years and is recommended by the High Court for appointment. The expression 'in the service of the Union or of the State' has been interpreted by this Court to mean the judicial service. A person from judicial service can be appointed as a District Judge. However, Article 233(2) provides that a person who is not in the service of the Union, shall be eligible only if he has been in practice, as an advocate or a pleader for 7 years; meaning thereby, persons who are in service are distinguished category from the incumbent who can be appointed as District Judge on 7 years' practice as an advocate or a pleader. Article 233(2) nowhere provides eligibility of in­service candidates for consideration as a District Judge concerning a post requiring 7 years' practice as an advocate or a pleader. Requirement of 7 years' experience for advocate or pleader is qualified with a rider that he should not be in the service of the Union or the State. Article 233 provides two sources of recruitment, one from judicial service and the other from advocates or pleaders. There are two separate streams provided; one is for persons in judicial service, and the other is for those not in judicial service of the Union or the State and have practiced for seven years. The expression 'in service of the Union or the State' has been interpreted in Chandra Mohan (supra) to mean judicial service, not any other service of the Union or the State. Thus, it is clear that the members of the judicial service alone are eligible for appointment as against the post of District Judge as the only mode provided for the appointment of in­service candidates is by way of promotion. They can stake their claim as per rules for promotion or merit promotion as the case may be. This Court has excluded the persons from the Indian Civil Service, the Provincial Judicial Service, or other Executive Services, before Independence, recruitment to the post of District Judge was provided from other services also. In Chandra Mohan (supra), this Court held that no person from the Executive Service can be promoted as District Judge. There is separation of the judiciary in terms of Article 50 of the Constitution of India. It mandates the State to take steps to separate the judiciary from the Executive in the public services of the State. Article 50 is extracted hereunder:
"50. Separation of judiciary from executive. ­­ The State shall take steps to separate the judiciary from the executive in the public services of the State."
14. Article 233(2) provides that if an advocate or a pleader has to be appointed, he must have completed 7 years of practice. It is coupled with the condition in the opening part that the person should not be in service of the Union or State, which is the judicial service of the State. The person in judicial service is not eligible for being appointed as against the quota reserved for advocates. Once he has joined the stream of service, he ceases to be an advocate. The requirement of 7 years of minimum experience has to be considered as the practising advocate as on the cut­off date, the phrase used is a continuous state of affair from the past. The context 'has been in practice' in which it has been used, it is apparent that the provisions refers to a person who has been an advocate or pleader not only on the cut­off date but continues to be so at the time of appointment.

17. After having answered the question about recruitment from the Bar, the further question considered in Chandra Mohan (supra) was whether the Governor could directly appoint persons from service other than judicial service as District Judges in consultation with the High Court. They belonged to the executive branch of the Government and performed certain revenue and ministerial functions. This Court took note of the fact that in the pre­Independence era, there was a demand that the judiciary should be separated from the Executive, and that was based upon the assumption that unless they were separated, independence of the judiciary at the lower level would be a mockery. Thus, Article 50 of Directive Principles of State Policy provides that States to take steps to separate judiciary from the executive in public services of the State. There shall be separate judicial service from the executive service. This Court considered the provisions of Articles 234, 235, 236 and 237 and observed that there are two sources of recruitment, services of the Union or State and members of the Bar. This Court observed thus:

"15. With this background, if the following provisions of the Constitution are looked at, the meaning of the debated expressions therein would be made clear:
We have already extracted Art. 233.
Article 234. Appointments of persons other than district judges to the judicial service of a State shall be made by the Governor of the State in accordance with rules made by him in that behalf after consultation with the State Public Service Commission and with the High Court exercising jurisdiction in relation to such State.
Article 235. The control over district courts and courts subordinate thereto including the posting and promotion of, and the grant of leave to, persons belonging to the judicial service of a State and holding any post inferior to the post of district Judges shall be vested in the High Court; but nothing in this Article shall be construed as taking away from any such person any right of appeal which he may have under the law regulating the conditions of his service or as authorising the High Court to deal with him otherwise than in accordance with the conditions of his service prescribed under such law. 
Article 236. In this Chapter­
(a) the expression "district judge" includes judges of a city civil court, additional district judge, joint district judge, assistant district judge, chief judge of a small cause court, chief presidency magistrate, additional chief presidency magistrate, sessions judge, additional sessions judge and assistant sessions judge: 
(b) the expression "judicial service" means a service consisting exclusively of persons intended to fill the post of district judge and other civil judicial posts inferior to the post of district judge.
Article 237. The Governor may by public notification direct that the foregoing provisions of this Chapter and any rules made thereunder shall with effect from such date as may be fixed by him in that behalf apply in relation to any class or classes of magistrates in the State as they apply in relation to persons appointed to the judicial service of the State subject to such exceptions and modifications as may be specified in the notification.

The gist of the said provisions may be stated thus:

Appointments of persons to be, and the posting and promotion of, district judges in any State shall be made by the Governor of the State. There are two sources of recruitment, namely, (i) service of the Union or of the State, and (ii) members of the Bar. The said judges from the first source are appointed in consultation with the High Court and those from the second source are appointed on the recommendation of the High Court. But in the case of appointments of persons to the judicial service other than as district judges they will be made by the Governor of the State in accordance with rules framed by him in consultation with the High Court and the Public Service Commission. But the High Court has control over all the district courts and courts subordinate thereto, subject to certain prescribed limitations."
(emphasis supplied) As to the question whether persons from other services can be appointed as District Judges, the expression service of Union or State, has been held to be construed to be judicial service in Article 233(2) thus: 
16. So far there is no dispute. But the real conflict rests on the question whether the Governor can appoint as district judges persons from services other than the judicial service; that is to say, can he appoint a person who is in the police, excise, revenue or such other service as a district judge? The acceptance of this position would take us back to the pre­ independence days and that too to the conditions prevailing in the Princely States. In the Princely States one used to come across appointments to the judicial service from police and other departments. This would also cut across the well­knit scheme of the Constitution and the principle underlying it, namely, the judiciary shall be an independent service. Doubtless if Art. 233(1) stood alone, it may be argued that the Governor may appoint any person as a district judge, whether legally qualified or not, if he belongs to any service under the State. But Art. 233(l) is nothing more than a declaration of the general power of the Governor in the matter of appointment of district judges. It does not lay down the qualifications of the candidates to be appointed or denote the sources from which the recruitment has to be made. But the sources of recruitment are indicated in cl. (2) thereof. Under cl. (2) of Art. 233 two sources are given, namely, (i) persons in the service of the Union or of the State, and (ii) advocate or pleader. Can it be said that in the context of Ch. VI of Part VI of the Constitution "the service of the Union or of the State" means any service of the Union or of the State or does it mean the judicial service of the Union or of the State? The setting, viz., the chapter dealing with subordinate courts, in which the expression "the service" appears indicates that the service mentioned therein is the service pertaining to courts. That apart, Art. 236(2) defines the expression "judicial service" to mean a service consisting exclusively of persons intended to fill the post of district judge and other civil judicial posts inferior to the post of district judge. If this definition, instead of appearing in Art. 236, is placed as a clause before Art. 233(2), there cannot be any dispute that "the service" in Art. 233(2) can only mean the judicial service. The circumstance that the definition of "judicial service" finds a place in a subsequent Article does not necessarily lead to a contrary conclusion. The fact that in Article 233(2) the expression "the service" is used whereas in Arts. 234 and 235 the expression "judicial service" is found is not decisive of the question whether the expression "the service" in Art. 233(2) must be something other than the judicial service, for, the entire chapter is dealing with the judicial service. The definition is exhaustive of the service. Two expressions in the definition bring out the idea that the judicial service consists of hierarchy of judicial officers starting from the lowest and ending with district judges. The expressions "exclusively" and "intended" emphasise the fact that the judicial service consists only of persons intended to fill up the posts of district judges and other civil judicial posts and that is the exclusive service of judicial officers. Having defined "judicial service" in exclusive terms, having provided for appointments to that service and having entrusted the control of the said service to the care of the High Court, the makers of the Constitution would not have conferred a blanket power on the Governor to appoint any person from any service as a district judge.
18. We, therefore, construe the expression "the service" in cl. (2) of Art. 233 as the judicial service."

(emphasis supplied)

23. In Deepak Aggarwal (supra) a three­Judge Bench of this Court considered the provisions of Article 233(2) and held that service in Article 233 to mean judicial service and there is dichotomy of sources of recruitment, namely, (i) from judicial service; and (ii) from the advocate/pleader or in other words from the Bar. The meaning of the term advocate/pleader too has been considered by this Court. The expression "advocate" or "pleader" refers to the members of the Bar practicing law. Relying upon Sushma Suri v. Govt. (NCT of Delhi), (1999) 1 SCC 330, this Court further observed that members of the Bar meant classes of persons who were practicing in a court of law as pleaders or advocates. This Court further held that in Article 233(2), "if he has been for not less than seven years," the present perfect continuous tense is used for a position which began at some time in the past and is continuing. Therefore, one of the essential requirements is that such a person must with requisite period be continuing as an advocate on the date of application. This Court has observed:

"70. A few decisions rendered by some of the High Courts on the point may also be noticed here. In Sudhakar Govindrao Deshpande v. State of Maharashtra, 1986 Lab IC 710 (Bom) the issue that fell for consideration before the Bombay High Court was whether the petitioner therein who was serving as Deputy Registrar at the Nagpur Bench of the Bombay High Court, was eligible for appointment to the post of the District Judge. The advertisement that was issued by the High Court inviting applications for five posts of District Judges, inter alia, stated that, "candidate must ordinarily be an advocate or pleader who has practised in the High Court, Bombay or court subordinate thereto for not less than seven years on 1­10­ 1980". The Single Judge of the Bombay High Court considered Articles 233, 234 and 309 of the Constitution, relevant recruitment rules and noted the judgments of this Court in Chandra Mohan v. State of U.P., AIR 1966 SC 1987, Satya Narain Singh v. High Court of Judicature of Allahabad, (1985) 1 SCC 225 and Rameshwar Dayal v. State of Punjab, AIR 1961 SC 816. It was observed as follows: (Sudhakar case, Lab IC p. 715, para 16) "16. ... the phrase 'has been an advocate or a pleader' must be interpreted as a person who has been immediately prior to his appointment a member of the Bar, that is to say either an advocate or a pleader. In fact, in the above judgment, the Supreme Court has repeatedly referred to the second group of persons eligible for appointment under Article 233(2) as 'members of the Bar'. Article 233(2) therefore, when it refers to a person who has been for not less than seven years an advocate or pleader refers to a member of the Bar who is of not less than seven years' standing."
89. We do not think there is any doubt about the meaning of the expression "advocate or pleader" in Article 233(2) of the Constitution. This should bear the meaning it had in law preceding the Constitution and as the expression was generally understood. The expression "advocate or pleader" refers to legal practitioner and, thus, it means a person who has a right to act and/or plead in court on behalf of his client. There is no indication in the context to the contrary. It refers to the members of the Bar practising law. In other words, the expression "advocate or pleader" in Article 233(2) has been used for a member of the Bar who conducts cases in court or, in other words acts and/or pleads in court on behalf of his client. In Sushma Suri v. Govt. (NCT of Delhi), (1999) 1 SCC 330, a three­Judge Bench of this Court construed the expression "members of the Bar" to mean class of persons who were actually practising in courts of law as pleaders or advocates. ...

102. As regards construction of the expression, "if he has been for not less than seven years an advocate" in Article 233(2) of the Constitution, we think Mr Prashant Bhushan was right in his submission that this expression means seven years as an advocate immediately preceding the application and not seven years any time in the past. This is clear by use of "has been". The present perfect continuous tense is used for a position which began at sometime in the past and is still continuing. Therefore, one of the essential requirements articulated by the above expression in Article 233(2) is that such person must with requisite period be continuing as an advocate on the date of application."

(emphasis supplied) It is clear from the decision of Deepak Aggarwal (supra) that recruitment from the Bar is only from among practicing advocates and those continuing as advocates on the date of appointment. The submission that the issue of eligibility of in­service candidates did not come up for consideration is of no consequence as provisions of Article 233(2) came up for consideration directly before this Court.

32. Consistently, this Court in its previous judgments has taken the view which we now take. We find absolutely no reason to take a different view, though it was urged that mistakes committed earlier should not continue. We find the argument to be devoid of substance and based upon misapprehensions. We have found that the aforesaid decisions are vivid and clear, and there is no room to entertain such a submission then for a moment. Even otherwise, when the law has been administered in this country after Independence in the manner mentioned above on the principle of stare decisis and rules framed by various High Courts, we find ourselves unable to accept the submission raised on behalf of in­service candidates. The decisions in Satya Narain Singh (supra), Deepak Aggarwal (supra) and All India Judges Association case (supra) also cannot be said to be contrary to the provisions of Article 233. We unhesitatingly reject the submission to the contrary.

45. In view of the aforesaid discussion, we are of the opinion that for direct recruitment as District Judge as against the quota fixed for the advocates/pleaders, incumbent has to be practicing advocate and must be in practice as on the cut­off date and at the time of appointment he must not be in judicial service or other services of the Union or State. For constituting experience of 7 years of practice as advocate, experience obtained in judicial service cannot be equated/combined and advocate/pleader should be in practice in the immediate past for 7 years and must be in practice while applying on the cut­off date fixed under the rules and should be in practice as an advocate on the date of appointment. The purpose is recruitment from bar of a practicing advocate having minimum 7 years' experience.

47. We answer the reference as under :­

(i) The members in the judicial service of the State can be appointed as District Judges by way of promotion or limited competitive examination.

(ii) The Governor of a State is the authority for the purpose of appointment, promotion, posting and transfer, the eligibility is governed by the Rules framed under Articles 234 and 235.

(iii) Under Article 232(2), an Advocate or a pleader with 7 years of practice can be appointed as District Judge by way of direct recruitment in case he is not already in the judicial service of the Union or a State.

(iv) For the purpose of Article 233(2), an Advocate has to be continuing in practice for not less than 7 years as on the cut­off date and at the time of appointment as District Judge. Members of judicial service having 7 years' experience of practice before they have joined the service or having combined experience of 7 years as lawyer and member of judiciary, are not eligible to apply for direct recruitment as a District Judge.

(v) The rules framed by the High Court prohibiting judicial service officers from staking claim to the post of District Judge against the posts reserved for Advocates by way of direct recruitment, cannot be said to be ultra vires and are in conformity with Articles 14, 16 and 233 of the Constitution of India.

(vi) The decision in Vijay Kumar Mishra (supra) providing eligibility, of judicial officer to compete as against the post of District Judge by way of direct recruitment, cannot be said to be laying down the law correctly. The same is hereby overruled."

14. In Writ A No. 46742 of 2015 (Smt. Ruchi Chaudhary vs. High Court of Judicature at Allahabad and another) decided on 1.9.2015 this Court held that in a case of private job, decision of Deepak Aggarwal (supra) is of no help. Relevant paragraphs of the aforesaid judgment are quoted as under:-

"Learned Senior Counsel appearing for the petitioner pointed out that as the petitioner was enrolled as an advocate on 12 January 2002 and had worked as a Senior Analyst Para Legal in the CPA Global from 17 May 2010 to 6 June 2014 and had filled up application form on 10 June 2014, she had more than seven years standing as on 1 January 2015. The contention advanced by learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner is that not only did the petitioner have more than seven years standing prior to taking up the assignment of a Senior Analyst Para Legal on 17 May 2010 but even otherwise it cannot be urged that the petitioner was not an advocate of not less than seven years standing preceding the date of her application as she had not surrendered her licence and she was also performing work of a legal nature as she was a Senior Analyst Para Legal in the CPA Global. Learned Senior Counsel has, in support of his contention, placed reliance upon the provisions of Article 233 of the Constitution and also the decision of the Supreme Court in Deepak Aggarwal, particular to paragraphs 62, 62.2, 94 and 98. Learned Senior Counsel also placed reliance upon the provisions of Article 217(2)(b) of the Constitution and the decision of the Supreme Court in Mahesh Chandra Gupta Vs. Union of India & Ors.3.
Sri Manish Goyal, learned counsel for the respondents has also placed reliance upon the decision of the Supreme Court in Deepak Aggarwal and on a decision of a Division Bench of this Court in Writ-C No.664 of 20154. It is the submission of learned counsel for the respondents that in view of the provisions of Article 233 of the Constitution as interpreted by the Supreme Court in Deepak Aggarwal, the expression 'if he has been for not less than seven years an advocate' in Article 233(2) of the Constitution would mean seven years as an advocate immediately preceding the date of application and since the petitioner was not an advocate immediately preceding the date of the application, the candidature of the petitioner was rightly rejected.
.......
Learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner then contended that in any case, the nature of the work of the petitioner as a Senior Analyst Para Legal in CPA Global from 17 May 2010 to 6 June 2014 should not disentitle the petitioner from being considered as eligible for the post. The contention of learned Senior Counsel is that the service rendered on the post of Senior Analyst Para Legal is consistent with the work of an advocate and, therefore, in view of the decision of the Supreme Court in Deepak Aggarwal, she is eligible for appointment.
.........
In the present case, the petitioner was appointed as a full time Senior Analyst Para Legal. The application form submitted by the petitioner also shows that the petitioner is receiving salary of Rs.30,315/- per month. Her service conditions would also be governed by the rules framed by CPA Global.
This apart, from the application form submitted by the petitioner which has been enclosed with the writ petition, it transpires that the petitioner was enrolled as an advocate with the U.P. Bar Council on 12 January 2002 and the period of employment which the petitioner has mentioned in the application form is from 17 May 2010 to 6 June 2014. The petitioner has also stated that her standing as an advocate as on 1 January 2015 is eight years, three months and twenty-eight days. This is obviously the period commencing 12 January 2002 and ending 16 May 2010. The petitioner herself not considered for the period she was in employment with CPA Global as a Senior Analyst Para Legal.
The decision in the case of Deepak Aggarwal, therefore, does not help the petitioner."
(emphasis supplied)

15. It would also be relevant to take note of the judgment of this Court passed in Writ A No. 25580 of 2018 (Shiv Kumar and another vs. Honerable High Court of Judicature at Allahabad and another) decided on 5.4.2019, relevant paragraphs whereof are quoted as under:-

"It would be profitable to first refer to the various statutory provisions regarding the eligibility and appointment to the post of District Judge/UP HJS before proceeding to answer the controversy arising in this petition.
The first and foremost provision in this regard is Article 233 of the Constitution of India which reads as under:-
233. Appointment of district judges:-
"(1) Appointments of persons to be, and the posting and promotion of district judges in any State shall be made by the Governor of the State in consultation with the High Court exercising jurisdiction in relation to such State.
(2) A person not already in the service of the Union or of the State shall only be eligible to be appointed a district judge if he has been for not less than seven years an advocate or a pleader and is recommended by the High Court for appointment."
Article 233 (2) in unequivocal term provides that a person not already in service shall be eligible for appointment as District Judge if he has been in practice as an advocate or pleader for not less than 7 years provided his name is recommended for appointment by the High Court. In other words, as regards a person not already in service what is required is that he should be an advocate or pleader of 7 years standing and that his name is recommended by the High Court for appointment as District Judge. Thus, 7 years of standing as an advocate is one of the essential eligibility condition for appointment as District Judge.

After the above constitutional provision comes the Bar Council of India Rules framed under Section 49 of the Advocates Act, 1961. Rules 47 to 52 of the said Rules provide regarding employment of an Advocate.

In this regard, Rule 49 is relevant of our purpose and is quoted below:-

"49. An advocate shall not be a full-time salaried employee of any person, government, firm, corporation or concern, so long as he continues to practise, and shall, on taking up any employment, intimate the fact to the Bar Council on whose roll his name appears, and shall thereupon cease to practise as an advocate so long as he continues in such employment"
The aforesaid rule completely prohibits an advocate from taking any full time employment during his continuance of practice and provides that if he so takes up employment, he shall inform the Bar Council whereupon he shall cease to be in practice as an advocate so long his employment continues. Therefore, as soon as an advocate enrolled with the Bar Council takes up full time salaried employment he ceases to practice as an advocate.

The UP HJS Rules, 1975 vide Rule 5 provides for the source of recruitment to the Higher Judicial Service. It provides for three sources namely; by promotion from the Civil Judge (Senior Division); by promotion through limited competitive examination of Civil Judge (Senior Division); and by direct recruitment from amongst the advocates.

The aforesaid 3rd source of recruitment is relevant for our purpose and therefore Rule 5 (c) alone of the Rules is being reproduced herein below:-

5. Source of recruitment:-
(a) ..................
(b) ...................
(c) by direct recruitment from amongst the Advocates of not less than seven years standing on the first day of January next following the year in which the notice inviting applications is published"
A bare reading of the aforesaid Rule reveals that the eligibility for direct recruitment to the UP HJS is from amongst the advocates of not less than 7 years standing meaning thereby that a minimum of 7 years standing as an Advocate is a sine-qua-non for selection/appointment in UP HJS through direct recruitment.

It is in this context that a question has arisen before us whether a person or an advocate who takes up full time employment with the Bank as Law Officer and in discharge of his duties may be appearing for the employer before the law courts would still continue to be an advocate so as to count the period in service towards his standing as an advocate for selection/appointment to the UP HJS/District Judge.

The issue is very simple if we go by the strict literary sense in which the aforesaid provisions have been couched.

Article 233 (2) clearly provides 7 years standing as an advocate as the condition for eligibility for appointment as District Judge. Same is the position that has been reiterated by Rule 5 (c) of the UP HJS Rules, 1975. Thus, 7 years of standing as an advocate on the relevant date is sine-qua-non for appointment as District Judge or in UP HJS. At the same time Rule 49 of the Bar Council of India Rules clearly stipulates that an advocate who accepts a full time salaried employment ceases to practice as an advocate so long as he continues in such employment. In other words, as soon as an advocate enters into full time salaried employment, he looses the right to practice even though he may represent the employer before the law courts.

Rule 49 of the Bar Council of India Rules creates a legal fiction to the effect that a person duly enrolled as an advocate ceases to be one as soon as he takes a full time employment on salary even if continues to occasionally appear in law Court.

The purpose of creating a legal fiction is to create an imaginary thing to be legally in existence even if it does not exist in reality. So the image created by legal fiction has to be recognized as real, otherwise the purpose of such legal fiction would stand frustrated.

In such a situation, the petitioner who practiced as an advocate from 8.10.2010 to 6.10.2014 and then took up a full time salaried employment did not have to his credit 7 years of standing as an advocate while applying for UPHJS. The period of full time employment as Law Officer with the Bank despite his appearance before the court as part of the service condition would not make him a practicing advocate for the above purpose. The period of full time employment can not be treated as time spent on practice as an advocate.

In Satish Kumar Sharma a three Judges Bench was seized with a controversy with regard to withdrawal of the enrolment of an advocate by the Bar Council as he was a permanent employee of Himachal Pradesh State Electricity Board and was holding the post of Deputy Secretary with it. In the said case the advocate obtained the law decree in the year 1975 and entered into full time employment of the Board as Law Officer Grade-II and later rose to the post to the Deputy Secretary. During the course of employment he was permitted by the Board to act an advocate on its behalf. Later, he also got himself enrolled on 9.7.1984 as an advocate. However, the enrollment was withdrawn as he was in full time employment. The withdrawal of the enrolment was challenged by him before the Division Bench of the High Court but failed. The matter went up to the Supreme Court where an affidavit of the advocate to the effect that his duties with the Board right from Law Officer to the present post were exclusively those of an advocate and that he had been personally appearing for the Board before the various courts was brought on record but even then it was held that as the appellant was undoubtedly a full time salaried employee at the time of his enrolment as an advocate and continues to be so he can not be conferred with the status of an advocate. His duties, may be exclusively to work/plead in courts but having regard to the plain language and clear term of Rule 49 of the Bar Council of India Rules and looking to the fact that his substantial and predominant duties were not that of a lawyer except for mere occasional appearance in some courts solely on behalf of the Board would not make him an advocate.

In Haniraj L Chulani (Dr.)3 it was observed that legal profession requires full time attention and would not countenance advocates riding two horses or more at a time.

In the said case the petitioner was a medical practitioner and wanted to get himself enrolled as an advocate after obtaining decree of LLB. It was in that connection that the Court observed as above and proceeded to observe further as under:-

"It is axiomatic that an advocate has to burn the midnight oil for preparing his cases for being argued in the court next day. Advocates face examination every day when they appear in courts. It is not as if that after court hours an advocate has not to put in hard work on his study table in his chamber with or without the presence of his clients who may be available for consultation. To put forward his best performance as an advocate he is required to give wholehearted and full-time attention to his profession. Any flinching from such unstinted attention to his legal profession would certainly have an impact on his professional ability and expertise. If he is permitted to simultaneously practise as a doctor then the requirement of his full-time attention to the legal profession is bound to be adversely affected. Consequently, however equally dignified may be the profession of a doctor he can not simultaneously be permitted to practice law which is a full-time occupation. It is for ensuring the full-time attention of legal practitioners towards their profession and with a view to bringing out their best so that they can fulfill their role as an officer of the court and can give their best in the administration of the justice, that the impugned rule has been enacted by the State Legislature."
In Deepak Aggarawal the question that was raised before the Supreme Court was whether a public prosecutor/ Assistant Public Prosecutor/District Attorney/Assistant District Attorney/Deputy Advocate General who is in full time employment of the Government seizes to be an advocate or pleader within the meaning of Article 233 (2) of the Constitution.

It is in context with the above controversy that the Supreme Court referring to its earlier decision in Sushma Suri 4 considered the meaning of the expression 'advocate' used in the un-amended Rule 49 of the Bar Council of India Rules and held that if a person was on the roll of the Bar Council and was engaged either by employment or otherwise by the Union of India or the State for the purpose of practice before a court as an advocate such a person does not seize to be an advocate.

The aforesaid decision was in reference to the employment of an advocate as a lawyer and not for doing any other office duty. The predominant purpose of the employment in such a situation was that of an advocate rather than that of an official of the Government.

A Division Bench of this Court in Writ A No. 59375 of 2014 (Smt. Rashmi Sharma Vs. State of U.P., and 3 others) vide judgment and order dated 12.11.2014 decided a similar controversy which also related to the recruitment of U.P. HJS. In the said case also the petitioner was appointed as a full time Deputy Manager (Law) in Andhra Bank. Thus his name was not included in the list of eligible candidates for UP HJS on the ground that he was in full time employment. The Division Bench on consideration of the entire case law on the subject including Deepak Aggarwal came to the conclusion that mere appearance of the candidate before the Lok Adalat as representative of the Bank does not make him eligible and that the decision of the Deepak Aggarwal is of no help. The petition was accordingly dismissed.

A similar view was taken by another Division Bench of this Court vide its judgment and order dated 1.9.2015 passed in Writ A No. 46742 of 2015 (Smt. Ruchi Chaudhari Vs. High Court of Judicature of Allahabad and another). In the said case the candidate for U.P. HJS after enrolment as an advocate had taken up job as a Senior Analyst para legal in a company CPA Global. The period of working in the aforesaid full time employment was not counted towards her standing as an advocate and the writ petition was dismissed holding that the decision of the Deepak Aggarwal does not help her.

In yet another case a Division Bench of this Court in deciding Writ A No. 32440 of 2014 (Deep Kumar and 3 others Vs. State of U.P., and another) vide its judgment and order dated 16.6.2014 distinguishing Deepak Aggarwal's case did not permit the Law Officers in employment of the Bank to participate for direct recruitment to the U.P. Higher Judicial Service Examination of the year 2014 as they were full-time salaried employees of the Bank and no longer the advocates.

A similar view was expressed by one another Division Bench of which one of us (Pankaj Mithal, J.) was a member in Rajesh Chaubey which related to the present recruitment to the UP HJS. The Division Bench considering the decision of the Supreme Court in Deepak Aggarwal's case and the eligibility condition contained in Article 333 (2) and Rule 5 (c) of the UP HJS Rules read with Rule 49 of the Bar Council of India Rules held that once a person by virtue of his full time employment ceases to be an advocate, the period of service rendered by him would not ennure to his benefit for determining his standing as an advocate.

It may worth noting that the case of Deepak Aggarwal related to Public Prosecutors or Advocates in employment of Government who by nature of the duties assigned continued to appear before the law courts regularly on behalf of the employer. Their work during employment was treated to be predominantly to be of an advocate and was thus added towards standing as an advocate.

The position in the case of employment in other capacity is quite different from that of employment as public prosecutor. In such other services appearance before the Court is occasional and is not the predominant part of the duties. Therefore, mere occasional appearance of such employees in Courts/ tribunals while in full time employment in few cases that too solely on behalf of their employer can not be taken to mean that they are continuing to be in practice as advocates. It is but natural that in such employment their main job is not that of pleading and arguing cases before the law courts on behalf of a variety of persons as is expected of an advocate. The nature of their duties is mostly of advising, conveyance etc., which may not allow them enough time for regular appearance before the law courts thus depriving them of experience of a lawyer. Any effort to treat persons in such employment as practicing advocates would be de hors of Rule 49 of the Bar Council of India Rules. An advocate is a person who assists, defends, pleads, or prosecute for another. At times he may represent the State or the public at large in matters of public concern such as in criminal cases and for this limited purpose is a public advocate. The public prosecutor or the district attorney as such by the nature of his work is a public advocate. He as such despite his full time engagement with the State does not cease to be advocate. This is an exception to Rule 49 of the Bar Council of India Rules.

An advocate is a responsible officer of the Court. He is as important as a Judge in the matter of dispensation of justice. He is virtually a minister of justice equally in line with a Judge. He acquires the skills of advocacy by experience and it is often said that at times experience is much more important than knowledge. It is more true in the profession of law wherein devotion to higher cause, the cause of truth and justice is more vital. One gains knowledge through experience by regular practice which can not be acquired otherwise while in employment or by appearance in some stray cases. It is therefore elementary for holding the post of DJ/UPHJS to have atleast 7 years of actual standing as an advocate and not the theoretic knowledge of law as in full time employment.

In the above situation, the persons employed as public prosecutor/District Authority predominantly discharge functions of advocates and would be recognized as advocates in the light of Deepak Aggarwal's case but in no other situation or employment. In the present case, there is no material or evidence to establish that the predominant function of the employment of the petitioner as defined/described in the letter of appointment issued to him by his employer Bank is that of practice as a lawyer and that the other functions discharged by him are only bare minimum or incidental. The Circular letter of the Reserve Bank of India does not seek to alter the terms and conditions of employment of the petitioner, neither do stray appearances recorded in some court cases establish that the Bank had engaged the services of the petitioner, predominantly to represent it in cases before courts, tribunals etc. In view of the aforesaid facts and circumstances, we are of the opinion that in the light of the legal fiction created by Rule 49 of the Bar Council of India Rules, the petitioner who has full time employment of the SBI ceased to be an advocate and his service period would not be counted/added in his practice as an advocate to make him eligible for UPHJS.

Accordingly, there is no force in the petition. It is therefore dismissed."

(emphasis supplied)

16. The issue involved herein has also been considered time and again by Hon'ble Apex Court in the cases of Rameshwar Dayal vs. State of Punjab AIR 1961 SC 816, Chandra Mohan vs. State of U.P. AIR 1966 SC 1987, Sushma Suri vs. Govt of National Capital Territory of Delhi (1999) 1 SCC 330 and Satish Kumar Sharma vs. Bar Council of Himachal Pradesh (2001) 2 SCC 365, which have already been considered in the judgments quoted above, hence to avoid repetition are not being referred to separately.

17. Similarly, this issue has been considered by this Court in the cases of Rajesh Chaubey vs. Hon. High Court Judicature at Allahabad and another 2019 (3) ADJ 60, Smt. Rashmi Sharma vs. State of U.P. (Writ A No. 59375 of 2014) decided on 12.11.2014 and Rajesh Chaubey vs. Hon. High Court of Judicature at Allahabad and another (Writ A No. 27608 of 2018) decided on 2.1.2019 also.

18. The question was again considered and decided by this Court in Writ A No. 33829 of 2015 (Kumar Mitakshar vs. State of U.P. and others) decided on 20.4.2023. Relevant paragraphs of the aforesaid judgement are also quoted as under:-

"Taking note of the above submissions, we may further go through Article 233(2) of the Constitution which provides the eligibility for appointment as the District Judge of a person who is not in service of the Union of the State. It provides that any such person would be eligible for appointment if he has been for not less than 7 years as an Advocate/pleader and is recommended by the High Court. The appointment by direct recruitment to the Higher Judicial Service is made by the High Court in the spirit of the constitutional provision under Article 233(2) of the Constitution in accordance with the service Rules' 1975.
The language of Article 233(2) of the Constitution has been read and interpreted by the Apex Court in the case of Deepak Agarwal (supra) in the following manner:-
"102. As regards construction of the expression, ?if he has been for not less than seven years an advocate? in Article 233(2) of the Constitution, we think Mr. Prashant Bhushan was right in his submission that this expression means seven years as an advocate immediately preceding the application and not seven years any time in the past. This is clear by use of ?has been?. The present perfect continuous tense is used for a position which began at some time in the past and is still continuing. Therefore, one of the essential requirements articulated by the above expression in Article 233(2) is that such person must with requisite period be continuing as an advocate on the date of application. "
In the case of Dheeraj (supra) it was further considered in paragraphs-'58', '60(iv)' as under:-

"58. In view of the aforesaid discussion, we are of the opinion that for direct recruitment as District Judge as against the quota fixed for the advocates/pleaders, incumbent has to be practising advocate and must be in practice as on the cut off date and at the time of appointment he must not be in judicial service or other services of the Union or State. For constituting experience of 7 years of practice as advocate, experience obtained in judicial service cannot be equated/combined and advocate/pleader should be in practice in the immediate past for 7 years and must be in practice while applying on the cut off date fixed under the rules and should be in practice as an advocate on the date of appointment. The purpose is recruitment from bar of a practising advocate having minimum 7 years experience.
60. We answer the reference as under :
(iv) For the purpose of Article 233(2), an Advocate has to be continuing in practice for not less than 7 years as on the cut off date and at the time of appointment as District Judge. Members of judicial service having 7 years? experience of practice before they have joined the service or having combined experience of 7 years as lawyer and member of judiciary, are not eligible to apply for direct recruitment as a District Judge."
It is, thus, held in Deepak Agarwal (supra) and considered in Dheeraj Mor (supra) that 7 years standing as an Advocate means the period practising law as an Advocate for 7 years immediately preceding the application and not 7 years any time in the past. The applicant who is an Advocate/pleader should be in practice in the immediate past for 7 years and must be in practice, while applying, on the cut-off fixed under the rules and should be in practice as an Advocate on the date of appointment. The purpose is to recruit the members of the bar, i.e practising Advocates having minimum 7 years practice. The continuity accorded to the period of 7 years for computing eligibility criteria of experience as provided in Rule 5(c) of the U.P. Higher Judicial Service Rules 1975, thus, is determined with the decision of the Apex Court.

The contention of the learned senior counsel for the petitioner that the period of 1 year 2 months and 10 days is to be counted in the period practising law by the petitioner as on the date of application, the cut off date under the Rules, cannot be accepted as the requirement is that the total period of 7 years experience must be in continuity immediately preceding the last date of the submission of the application form.

The result is that as on 03.07.2014, i.e. the last date of submission of the application form, the petitioner herein had gained experience of only 6 years 11 months and 3 days as practising Advocate. He, therefore, cannot be said to be eligible for appointment by direct recruitment to the Higher Judicial Services as per the eligibility criteria under the U.P. Higher Judicial Service Rules, 1975 read with Article 233(2) of the Constitution of India.

As regards the submission of the learned senior Advocate that the observation in Deepak Agarwal (supra) in para-'102' would not be attracted in case of the petitioner, inasmuch as, the issue herein is covered by the decision in Rameshwar Dayal vs State of Punjab reported in AIR 1961 SC 816, suffice it to note that in Dheeraj Mor (supra), both the decisions of the Apex Court in Deepak Agarwal (supra) and Rameshwar Dayal (supra) had been considered to observe in para-'58' and '60(iv)' noted hereinabove.

The submission of the learned counsel for the appellant, therefore, cannot be accepted. Even otherwise the Apex Court in case of Deepak Agarwal (supra) has made observation in paragraph '102' that the words "has been" used in Article 233(2) of the Constitution being in present perfect continuous tense, continuous practice of 7 years or experience of continuous 7 years immediately preceding the cutoff date as per the service rules, is necessary.

The words "has been" used in Article 233(2) of the Constitution gives continuity to the period and the requirement, thus, is that the candidate for being treated as eligible must possess 7 years continuous period practising law immediately preceding the last date of submission of the application form i.e. on the cut off date as per the recruitment rules.

For the above discussion, no infirmity can be found in the decision of the respondent High Court.

The writ petition is, accordingly, dismissed."

(emphasis supplied)

19. The discussion made hereinabove clearly establishes that as per eligibility condition contained in Article 233 (2) of the Constitution of India and Rule 5 (c) of the U.P. H.J.S. Rules read with Rule 43 and 49 of the Bar Council of India Rules framed under Section 49 of the Advocates Act, 1961 completely prohibits an advocate from taking a part time / full time employment during continuance of his practice and if he takes any such employment he shall inform the Bar Council whereas he shall ceases to practice as an advocate so long as he continues in such employment and that Rule 49 creates a legal fiction that on taking of full time employment he ceases to be an advocate and cannot be conferred status of an advocate.

20. No doubt, it can be argued that nature of work matters, however, the law as discussed above clearly establishes that now settled law is that full time work/employment as a public prosecutor is distinguishable and is different from full time employment with any other bank/private company/ employer etc. This conclusion can be safely drawn from the judgement of Dheeraj Mor (supra) and various other judgements of Division Bench of this Court.

21. Coming back to the facts of this case, it may be noted that the petitioner was registered as an advocate on 16.11.1998; vide appointment letter dated 15.1.2009 he was appointed as Law Officer in a private company, namely, M/s Alliance Builders and Contractors Limited Bareilly; it is alleged that apart from the said company, he had filed Vakalatnamas on behalf of other litigants; he appeared in UP HJS Examination-2009 and qualified in prelims and written examination but was not permitted to appear in interview on the ground that he was in full time salaried class employment; as he intended to appear in UP HJS, he tendered his resignation from the company on 01.1.2010, which was accepted on 01.2.2010; in UP HJS 2012, he could not qualify in interview; in UP HJS-2014, he could not qualify. In the relevant UP HJS Examination-2016, he filled the form, however, allegedly there was some mistake hence, he filed affidavit dated 12.6.2016 and cleared prelims and written examination and was called for interview on 22.4.2017 but his name did not find figure in the select list; when he came to know that he had obtained 471 marks whereas last general category selected candidate has obtained only 455 marks, he filed representation which was rejected. Hence, present petition has been filed.

22. We have already noted and discussed the case law on the issue in hand extensively. We have also noted the resolution of the Selection and Appointment Committee taken in its meeting dated 17.5.2017. The admitted facts of the case are that as per para 10 of the appointment letter dated 15.1.2009 the appointment of the petitioner was on a full time basis with specific condition that he shall devote full time to the duty assigned by the company and that he will not engage himself for any other person, firm or company in any capacity during his appointment with the company. Further, the petitioner in his resignation letter dated 01.1.2010 also clearly admits this fact that he is in full time employment of the company and for this reason he was prevented from appearing in interview of the UP HJS Examination, 2009 and therefore he wishes to tender resignation. Further, his affidavit dated 12.6.2016 also admits this fact he was in private employment from 15.1.2009 to 01.2.2010.

23. During the course of arguments, learned counsel for the petitioner sought to place reliance on a letter dated 19.1.2009 allegedly given by the company, crux whereof appears to be that the petitioner can continue with his other clients as well. We may put it on record that on a pointed query, learned counsel for the petitioner could not dispute the fact that this document has never been mentioned or relied on earlier and has surfaced for first time in the present petition. We, therefore, are not inclined to place reliance thereon. In so far as filing of Vakalatnama on behalf of others in the year 2009-10 is concerned, we restrain ourselves from going into the issue that when the petitioner was in full time employment of a private company, whether, his act of filing Vakalatnama was in violation of Rule 43 and 49 of the Bar Council Rules or was in violation of terms of his appointment as Law Officer of the company, as this issue is not before us.

24. In view of the discussion made hereinabove, we do not find any fault in the resolution of the Selection and Appointment Committee that length of continuous practice of the petitioner on 18.6.2016 from 1.2.2010 was found to be 6 years 4 months and 17 days and thus, he did not fulfill the necessary eligibility criteria of having 7 years continuous practice as on 18.6.2016.

25. The petition is devoid of merits and is accordingly dismissed. No costs.

Order Date :- 23.4.2024 Lalit Shukla    
================================================================================


================================================================================
CASE 28:
[Cites 93, Cited by 519]
Supreme Court of India
The Life Insurance Corporation Of India vs D. J. Bahadur & Ors on 10 November, 1980
Equivalent citations: 1980 AIR 2181, 1981 SCR (1)1083, AIR 1980 SUPREME COURT 2181, 1981 (1) SCC 315, ILR (1981) 1 P&H 1, 1981 SCC (L&S) 111
Author: V.R. Krishnaiyer
Bench: V.R. Krishnaiyer, R.S. Pathak, A.D. Koshal
           PETITIONER:
THE LIFE INSURANCE CORPORATION OF INDIA

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
D. J. BAHADUR & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT10/11/1980

BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
PATHAK, R.S.
KOSHAL, A.D.

CITATION:
 1980 AIR 2181		  1981 SCR  (1)1083
 1981 SCC  (1) 315
 CITATOR INFO :
 R	    1981 SC1829	 (75)
 C	    1982 SC1126	 (3,7,12,13,16,18,19)
 RF	    1984 SC1130	 (33,34,40)
 F	    1987 SC1527	 (17,28)
 RF	    1991 SC 855	 (53)


ACT:
     Life Insurance Corporation Act (Act 31), 1956, sections
11, 23	and 49,	 scope of-Whether a general law or a special
law-Industrial Disputes	 Act (Act  14)	1947,  sections	 9A,
19(2),	(6),  18,  23,	29-Object  of  the  Act,  award	 and
settlement, distinction	 from the  point of  view  of  legal
force-Whether a special legislation vis-a-vis Life Insurance
Corporation Act-Annual	cash bonus  payable to Class-III and
Class-IV employees  of the  Corporation under the settlement
of 1974,  effect of-Effect  of notice  of termination of the
settlements by	the Corporation	 under sections 9A and 19(2)
of the	Industrial Disputes  Act and  section 49 of the Life
Insurance  Corporation	 Act-Constitution  of  India,  1950,
Articles 12,  38, 39  and 43  and Regulation  58 of the Life
Insurance Corporation of India (Staff) Regulations, 1960.



HEADNOTE:
     The Life  Insurance Corporation  came into existence on
the  1st  of  September,  1956,	 as  a	statutory  authority
established under  the Life  Insurance Corporation  Act (Act
31), 1956.  As from  the said date all institutions carrying
on Life Insurance business in India were nationalised to the
extent of  such business  and their corresponding assets and
liabilities were  transferred to the Corporation. Section 11
of the	Act provided  for the  transfer of  service of those
employees of  such institutions who were connected with Life
Insurance business  immediately before	the said date to the
Corporation and	 for some  other matters.  Section 23 of the
Life Insurance	Corporation Act	 gave to the Corporation the
power to employ such number of persons as it thought fit for
the purpose  of enabling it to discharge its functions under
the Act	 and declared that every person so employed or whose
services stood	transferred to the Corporation under section
11 would  be liable  to serve  anywhere in India. Section 49
conferred on  the Corporation  the power to make regulations
for the	 purpose of  giving effect  to the provisions of the
Act with  the previous	approval of  the Central Government.
Sub-section (2)	 of that  section enumerated various matters
in relation  to which such power was particularly conferred.
On 1st	of June, 1957 the Central Government promulgated the
Life Insurance	Corporation (Alteration	 of Remuneration and
other Terms  and Conditions  of Service of Employees) Order,
1957  altering	 the  remuneration   and  other	  terms	 and
conditions of  service of those employees of the Corporation
whose service  had been	 transferred to it under sub-section
(1) of	section 11. Clause 9 of the 1957 Order declared that
no bonus  would be  paid but  directed that  the Corporation
would set  aside an  amount every  year for  expenditure  on
schemes of  general benefit  to the  employees such  as free
insurance scheme, medical benefit scheme and other amenities
to them.  On the  26th June,  1959, the	 Central  Government
amended clause	9 of  the 1957	Order so  as to provide that
non-profit sharing bonus would be paid to those employees of
the Corporation	 whose salary  did not	exceed Rs.  500	 per
month. On  2nd of  July, 1959 there was a settlement between
the Corporation	 and its  employees providing for payment to
them of cash bonus at the rate of 1 1/2
1084
months' basic  salary for the period from the 1st September,
1956 to	 the 31st  December, 1961. In the year 1960 the Life
Insurance Corporation  of India	 (Staff)  Regulations,	1960
were framed  and Regulation  58 dealt  with the	 payment  of
grant of  non-profit sharing bonus to its employees. On 14th
April, 1962  and 3rd  August, 1963 orders were again issued,
the effect  of which  was to  remove the limit of Rs. 500 on
the basic  salary as  a condition of eligibility for payment
of bonus.  The settlement  dated 2nd July, 1959 was followed
by three  others which	were arrived at on the 29th January,
1963.  the   20th  June,  1970	and  the  26th	June,  1972,
respectively and  each one  of which provided for payment of
bonus at a particular rate.
     Disputes between  the Corporation	and its	 workmen  in
regard to  the latter's	 conditions of service were received
by two	settlements dated the 24th January, 1974 and the 6th
February, 1974, arrived at in pursuance of the provisions of
section 18 read with section 2(p) of the Industrial Disputes
Act. The  Corporation was  a party  to both  the settlements
which were  identical in  terms. However,  while four of the
five Unions  of workmen	 subscribed to the first settlement,
the  fifth   Union  was	 a  signatory  to  the	second.	 The
settlements provided  for revised  scales of pay, the method
of their  fixation and dearness and other allowances as well
as bonus.  The settlements were approved by the Board of the
Corporation  and   also	 by   the  Central  Government.	 The
employees of the Corporation having opted for the new scales
of pay, bonus was paid in accordance therewith for the years
1973-74	 and  1974-75  in  April  1974	and  in	 April	1975
respectively. One  of the  Payment of Bonus (Amendment) Act,
1976 coming  into force	 with retrospective effect from 25th
September,  1975  curtailing  the  rights  of  employees  of
industrial undertakings to bonus, though it was inapplicable
to the Corporation by virtue of the provisions of section 32
of the	Payment of  Bonus Act,	the payment of bonus for the
year 1975-76 to the employees of the Corporation was stopped
under instructions from the Central Government, whose action
in that	 behalf was  challenged by  the employees  through a
petition under	Article 226  of the Constitution of India in
the High  Court of  Calcutta. The  single Judge	 of the High
Court issued a writ of mandamus directing the Corporation to
act in accordance with the terms of the settlement dated the
24th of	 January, 1974.	 The Corporation preferred a Letters
Patent appeal  against the  decision of	 the learned  single
Judge and  that appeal was pending disposal when the Central
Government  promulgated	  the  Life   Insurance	 Corporation
(Modification of  Settlement) Act,  1976 on  29th May, 1976.
The said  Act was  challenged by  the workmen in the Supreme
Court which  by a  judgment dated 21st February, 1980 (Madan
Mohan Pathak  v. Union	of India, [1978] 3 SCR 334) declared
it to be void as offending Article 31(2) of the Constitution
of India  and  directed	 the  Corporation  to  forbear	from
implementing the  1976 Act  and to  pay to its Class-III and
Class-IV employees  bonus for  the years  1st April  1975 to
31st March  1976 and  1st April	 1976 to  31st March 1977 in
accordance with	 the terms of sub-clause (ii) of clause 8 of
each settlement.
     On 3rd  March,  1978  the	Corporation  issued  to	 its
workmen a  notice under sub-section (2) of section 19 of the
Industrial Disputes Act declaring its intention to terminate
the settlements on the expiry of a period of two months from
the date  of the  notice was  served.  The  notice,  however
mentioned in express terms that according to the Corporation
no such	 notice was  really necessary for termination of the
settlements. On	 the same date, another notice was issued by
the Corporation under section 9A of the Industrial
1085
Disputes Act  stating that it intended to effect a change in
accordance with	 the contents of the annexure to the notice,
as from	 the 1st June, 1978, in the conditions of service of
its workmen.  On 26th  May,  1978,  the	 Central  Government
issued a notification under section 49 of the Life Insurance
Corporation Act	 substituting a	 new regulation for the then
existing  regulation  bearing  serial  number  58.  The	 new
regulation was	to come	 into force  from the  1st of  June,
1978. Simultaneously,  an amendment  on the  same lines	 was
made in	 the 1957  Order by the substitution of a new clause
for  the   then	 existing  clause  9  in  pursuance  of	 the
provisions of  sub-section (2) of section 11 of the L. I. C.
Act.
     These  two	  notices  dated  3rd  March,  1978  by	 the
Corporation under  sections 19(2)  and 9A  of the Industrial
Disputes Act  respectively  and	 the  action  taken  by	 the
Central Government  on the  26th May,  1978  by	 making	 new
provisions  in	regard	to  the	 payment  of  bonus  to	 the
Corporation's employees	 were challenged successfully by the
workmen in  a petition	to the	Allahabad High	Court  under
Article 226  of the  Constitution of  India  and  hence	 the
appeal by the Corporation.
     Allowing the appeal by majority, the Court
^
     HELD :
     Per Iyer, J.-A. The Industrial Disputes Act is a benign
measure which seeks to pre-empt industrial tensions, provide
the  mechanics	 of  dispute  resolutions  and	set  up	 the
necessary infra-structure  so that  the energies of partners
in production  may not	be dissipated  in counter-productive
battles and  assurance of  industrial justice  may create  a
climate of  goodwill. Its  object is  "the investigation and
settlement of  industrial disputes".  Parliament has  picked
out  the   specific  subject   of  industrial  disputes	 for
particularised treatment,  whether the	industry be  in	 the
private or  public sector  or otherwise.  The  meat  of	 the
statute is  industrial dispute, not conditions of employment
or contract of service as such. [1106E, 1110D, 1111B-C]
     Bangalore Water  Supply and  Sewerage Board v. Rajappa,
[1978] 2 SCC 213, applied.
     B.	 (1)   The  Industrial	Disputes  Act  substantially
equates an  award with	a settlement, from the point of view
of their legal force. No distinction in regard to the nature
and period of their effect can be discerned, especially when
one reads  section 19(2)  and (6). Further, it is clear from
section 18  that  a  settlement,  like	an  Award,  is	also
binding. Thus  both settlements and Awards stand on the same
footing. [1109F, G, 1109 E]
     (2) There	are three  stages or  phases with  different
legal effects  in the  life of an Award or Settlement. There
is a  specific period  contractually or statutorily fixed as
the period of operation. Thereafter, the Award or Settlement
does not  become non  est, but continues to be binding. This
is the	second chapter	of legal  efficacy but qualitatively
different. Then comes the last phase. If notice of intention
to terminate is given under section 19(2) or 19(6), then the
third stage  opens where  the Award  or the  Settlement does
survive and  is in  force between  the parties as a contract
which has superseded the earlier contract and subsists until
a new  Award or	 negotiated settlement takes its place. Like
nature, Law  abhors a  vacuum and  even	 on  the  notice  of
termination under section 19(2) or (6), the sequence and
1086
consequence cannot  be just  void but  a continuance  of the
earlier terms,	but with  liberty to  both  sides  to  raise
disputes, negotiate  settlements or  seek  a  reference	 and
Award. Until  such a  new contract  or	Award  replaces	 the
previous one,  the former  settlement or Award will regulate
the relation between the parties. Industrial law frowns upon
a lawless void and under general law the contract of service
created by  an Award  or Settlement  lives so  long as a new
lawful contract is brought into being. [1114 A-F]
     (3) The  precedents on  the point,	 the  principles  of
Industrial Law,	 the constitutional  empathy of	 Part IV and
the sound  rules of  statutory construction  converge to the
same point  that when  a notice intimating termination of an
Award or  Settlement is	 issued the  legal import  in merely
that the  stage is  set for fresh negotiations or industrial
adjudication and until either effort ripens into a fresh set
of conditions  of service  the previous	 Award or Settlement
does regulate  the relations  between the  employer and	 the
employees. [1124 F-G]
     Judhisthir Chandra	 v. Mukherjee,	AIR 1950  Cal.	577;
Mangaldas Narandas  v.	Payment	 of  Wages  Authority  etc.,
(1957) II LLJ 256 (Bombay D. B.); Workmen of New Elphinstone
Theatre v.  New Elphinstone  Theatre, (1961) I LLJ 105 (119)
(Madras); Yamuna  Mills Co.  Ltd. v. Majdoor Mahajan Mandal,
Baroda &  Ors., (1957)	I LLJ  620 (Bom.); Sathya Studios v.
Labour Court,  (1978) I	 LLJ 227  (Madras); Maruti  Mahipati
Mullick &  Anr. v. M/s. Polson Ltd. & Anr., (1970) Lab. & I.
C. 308 (Bom.), approved.
     South Indian  Bank Ltd.  v. A.  R. Chako,	[1964] 4 SCR
625; Management	 of  Indian  Oil  Corporation  Ltd.  v.	 Its
Workmen, 1  SCR	 110;  Md.  Qasim  Larry,  Factory  Manages,
Sasamusa Sugar	Works v.  Md. Samsuddin & Anr., [1964] 7 SCR
419; followed.
     (4) The  Settlement under the I. D. Act does not suffer
death merely  because of  the notice  issued  under  section
19(2).	All  that  is  done  is	 a  notice  "intimating	 its
intention to  terminate the  Award". The  Award even  if  it
ceases to  be operative	 qua award,  continues qua contract.
Therefore, if  the Industrial  Disputes	 Act  regulates	 the
jural relations	 between the  L. I.  C. and its employees-an
"if"-then the  rights under  the settlements  of 1974 remain
until replaced	by a  later Award  or Settlement. [1124 G-H,
1125 A-B]
     C. (1) In determining whether a statute is a special or
a general  one. the  focus must	 be on the principal subject
matter	plus   the  particular	 perspective.  For   certain
purposes, the  Act may	be general  and	 for  certain  other
purposes it may be special. [1127 B-C]
     (2) The Life Insurance Corporation Act is not a law for
employment   or	   disputes   arising	therefrom,   but   a
nationalisation measure	 which	incidentally,  like  in	 any
general take-over  legislation,	 provides  for	recruitment,
transfers, promotions  and the like. It is special vis-a-vis
nationalisation of  life insurance,  but  general  regarding
contracts  of  employment  or  acquiring  office  buildings.
Emergency  measures   are   special,   for   sure,   Regular
nationalisation	 statutes   are	  general   even   if	they
incidentally refer  to conditions  of service. [1111 H, 1112
A-B]
     (3) So  far as nationalisation of insurance business is
concerned, the	Life  Insurance	 Corporation  is  a  special
legislation, but  equally indubitably is the inference, from
a bare	perusal of  the subject,  scheme  and  sections	 and
understanding of the anatomy of the Act, that it has nothing
to do  with  the  particular  problem  of  disputes  between
employer   and	 employees,   and   of	 investigation	 and
adjudication of labour dispute. [1126 G-H, 1127 A]
1087
     On the  other hand,  the Industrial  Disputes Act	is a
special	 statute   devoted  wholly   to	 investigation	 and
settlement   of	   industrial	disputes    which   provides
definitionally for  the nature of industrial disputes coming
within	its   ambit.  It   creates  an	infra-structure	 for
investigation  into,   solution	 of  and  adjudication	upon
industrial  disputes.	It  also   provides  machinery	 for
enforcement of	Awards and  Settlements. From alpha to omega
the I.	D. Act	has one	 special mission-the  resolution  of
industrial disputes  through specialised  agencies according
to specialised	procedures and with special reference to the
weaker categories  of employees coming within the definition
of workmen. Therefore, with reference to industrial disputes
between employers  and workmen,	 the I.	 D. Act is a special
statute, and  the L.  I. C.  Act does  not speak at all with
specific reference to workmen. On the other hand, its powers
relate	to   the  general  aspects  of	nationalisation,  of
management when	 private businesses  are nationalised  and a
plurality of  problems which, incidentally, involve transfer
of service  of existing	 employees of  insurers. The workmen
qua workmen  and industrial disputes between workmen and the
employer as  such, are	beyond the  orbit  of  and  have  no
specific or  special place  in the scheme of the L.I.C. Act.
[1127 C-F]
     (4)  Thus,	  vis-a-vis  "industrial  disputes"  at	 the
termination of the Settlement as between the workmen and the
Corporation, the  I. D. Act is a special legislation and the
L.  I.	 C.  Act   a  general  legislation.  Likewise,	when
compensation on	 nationalisation is  the question, the L. I.
C. Act	is  the	 special  statute.  An	application  of	 the
generalia maxim	 makes it  clear that  the I.  D. Act  being
special law,  prevails over  L. I. C. Act which is a general
law. [1127 H, 1128 A-B]
     U. P.  State Electricity  Board v. H. S. Jain, [1979] 1
SCR 355, J. K. Cotton Spinning and Weaving Mills Co. Ltd. v.
State of Uttar Pradesh, AIR 1961 SC 1170 at 1174, followed.
     (5) Section  11 of	 the Life Insurance Corporation Act,
1956 does  not repel  the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947. The
provisions of  the L.  I. C.  Act which contained provisions
regarding conditions  of  service  of  employees  would	 not
become redundant,  if the I. D. Act was held to prevail. For
one thing,  the provisions  of sections	 11 and	 49 are	 the
usual general  provisions  giving  a  statutory	 corporation
power to  recruit and prescribe conditions of service of its
total  staff-not   anything  special   regarding  `workmen'.
Secondly, no  case of  redundant  words	 arose	because	 the
Corporation, like  a University,  employed not	only workmen
but others  also and to regulate their conditions of service
power was  needed.  Again,  institutions  where	 no  dispute
arose. power  in the employer to fix the terms of employment
had to be vested. [1129 F-H, 1130 A-B]
     Bangalore Water  Supply and  Sewarage Board v. Rajappa,
[1978] 2  SCC 813;  D. N.  Banerji v. P. R. Mukherjee & Ors.
[1953] SCR 302, followed.
     (6) Whatever  be the powers of regulation of conditions
of  service,  including	 payment  or  non-payment  of  bonus
enjoyed by  the employees of the Corporation under the L. I.
C. Act	subject to the directives of the Central Government,
they stem from a general Act and cannot supplant, subvert or
substitute the	special legislation which specifically deals
with  industrial   disputes  between   workmen	 and   their
employees. [1131 F-H]
     [The Court	 directed  the	Corporation  to	 fulfil	 its
obligations in	terms of  the  1974  settlements  and  start
negotiations like a model employer, for a fair settlement of
the conditions	of service  between itself and its employees
having
1088
realistic and  equitable regard to the prevailing conditions
of life, principles of industrial justice and the directives
underlying Part IV of the Constitution.]
     Per Pathak	 J. (Concurring	 with Iyer, J.) (1) Both the
limbs of  sub-section (2) of section 11 of the L. I. C. Act,
1956 are  intended to  constitute  a  composite	 process  of
rationalising the scales of remuneration and other terms and
conditions of  service of  transferred employees with a view
not  only   to	effecting   a  standardisation	between	 the
transferred employees  but also	 to revising their scales of
remuneration, and  terms and  conditions  of  service  to  a
pattern, which will enable the newly established Corporation
to become  a viable  and commercially successful enterprise.
For that  reason, it is open to the Central Government under
the sub-section	 to ignore  the guarantee  contained in sub-
section (1)  of section	 11 in	favour of  the employees  or
anything contained  in the  Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 or
any other  law for  the time  being in	force or  any award,
settlement or  agreement for  the time being in force. [1135
D-G]
     The second limb of sub-section (2) of section 11 is not
related	 to  employees	generally,  that  is  to  say,	both
transferred  and   newly   recruited   employees,   of	 the
Corporation. It	 is confined to transferred employees. There
is no  danger of  an order  made by  the Central  Government
under the  second limb	of  subsection	(2)  in	 respect  of
transferred employees  being struck  down on the ground that
it violates  the equality  provisions of  Part	III  of	 the
Constitution because  similar action  has not  been taken in
respect of  newly recruited employees. So long as such order
is confined  to what  is  necessitated	by  the	 process  of
transfer  and	integration,   the   transferred   employees
constitute a reasonably defined class in themselves and form
no common basis with newly recruited employees. [1136 C-E]
     The power	under the  second limb of sub-section (2) of
section 11  can be  exercised more  than once. To effectuate
the  transfer	appropriately  and   completely	 it  may  be
necessary to  pass through  different stages,  and  at	each
stage to  make a  definite order.  So long as the complex of
orders so  made is  necessarily linked	with the  process of
transfer and integration, it is immaterial that a succession
of orders  is made.  The deletion of the words "from time to
time" found in the Bill, is of no consequence. [1136 E-G]
     (2) The notification dated 26th May, 1980 purporting to
amend the Standardisation Order is invalid. It has no effect
on the	right to  bonus by the workmen. The notification was
intended to apply to transferred employees only. It declares
explicitly that	 the Central  Government is satisfied that a
revision of  the terms	and conditions	of  service  of	 the
transferred employees  is considered necessary. This is made
explicit by  the circumstance that identical provisions have
been made by the Corporation, with the prior approval of the
Central	 Government,   in  the	 new  Regulation   58  of  a
notification issued  under both	 clauses (b) and (bb). [1137
A-C]
     (3) A  settlement under the Industrial Disputes Act, in
essence, is  a contract between the employer and the workmen
prescribing  new  terms	 and  conditions.  As  soon  as	 the
settlement is  concluded and becomes operative, the contract
embodied in  it takes  effect and  the	existing  terms	 and
conditions of  the workmen  are modified accordingly. Unless
there is  something to	the contrary in a particular term or
condition of the Settlement the embodied contract
1089
endures indefinitely,  continuing  to  govern  the  relation
between	 the   parties	in  future,  subject  of  course  to
subsequent alteration  through a  fresh settlement, award or
valid legislation.  Settlement is  not only  a contract	 but
something more.	 Conceptually,	it  is	a  "settlement".  It
concludes or  "settles" a dispute. In order the new contract
be afforded  a chance  of being	 effectively  worked  out  a
mandate obliging  the parties to unreservedly comply with it
for a  period of time is desirable. It was made "binding" by
the statute  for such  period. On the expiry of such period,
the ban	 lifts, and  the parties  are at  liberty to seek an
alteration of the contract. [1138 E-H-1139 A-C]
     The law  laid down	 in South  Indian Bank Ltd. v. A. R.
Chacko [1964]  5 SCR  825  and	Md.  Quasim  Larry,  Factory
Manager, Sasamusa  Sugar Works	v. Md.	Shamsuddin  &  Anr.,
[1964] 7  SCR 419  in respect of an Award applies equally in
relation to a settlement. [1140B]
     (4) The  Industrial Disputes  Act is  a special law and
must prevail  over the	Corporation Act,  a general law, for
the purpose  of	 protecting  the  sanctity  of	transactions
concluded under	 the  former  enactment.  Regulation  58,  a
product	 of   the  Corporation	Act,  cannot  supersede	 the
contract respecting bonus between the parties resulting from
the settlement of 1974. [1142 B-D]
     Plainly, if a settlement resolves an industrial dispute
under the  Industrial  Disputes	 Act,  it  pertains  to	 the
central purpose	 of that Act. This constitutes a special law
in respect  of	a  settlement  reached	under  the  auspices
between	 an   employer	and  his  "workmen"  employees.	 The
consequences of	 such settlement  are  the  product  of	 the
special law. [1141 E-F]
     The Corporation Act was enacted primarily for effecting
the  nationalisation   of   Life   Insurance   business	  by
transferring all  such business to a Corporation established
for that  purpose. Clearly, the object behind section 11(1),
section 23  and clauses (b) and (bb) of section 49(2) of the
L. I.  C. Act is to provide staff and labour for the purpose
of the	proper management of the nationalised Life Insurance
business. The  Corporation Act does not possess the features
found in  the Industrial  Disputes Act. No special provision
exists in regard to industrial disputes and their resolution
and  the   consequences	 of  that  resolution.	The  special
jurisdiction created  for the  purpose under  the Industrial
Disputes Act  is not  the subject  matter of the Corporation
Act at	all. No	 corresponding provision  in the Corporation
Act, a	subsequent enactment,  deals with the subject matter
enacted in  the Industrial Disputes Act. [1140 F, 1141 A, F-
G]
     Yet   Parliament	 intended   to	 provide   for	 the
Corporation's "workmen"	 employees the same opportunities as
are available  under the  Industrial  Disputes	Act  to	 the
workmen of  other  employers,  as  demonstrated	 by  section
2(a)(1) of  the Corporation Act. The expression "appropriate
Government" is	specifically defined by it in relation to an
industrial   dispute	concerning   the    Life   Insurance
Corporation. Both the Central Government and the Corporation
understood the	Industrial Disputes  Act in that light, for,
Regulation 51(2)  of the  (Staff) Regulations  made  by	 the
Corporation under  clauses (b)	and (bb) of section 49(2) of
the Corporation	 Act, with  the	 previous  approval  of	 the
Central Government, speaks of giving effect to a revision of
scales of  pay, dearness  allowance, or other allowances "in
pursuance of any award, agreement or settlement." [1141 G-H,
1142 A-C]
     Life Insurance  Corporation of  India  v.	Sunil  Kumar
Mukherjee, [1964]  5 SCR  528; Sukhder	Singh v. Bhagat Ram,
[1975] 3 SCR 619, referred to.
1090
     U. P.  State Electricity  Board &	Ors. v. Hari Shanker
Jain &	Ors. [1979]  1 SCR  355; J.  K. Cotton	Spinning and
Weaving Mills  Co. Ltd., v. State of Uttar Pradesh, AIR 1961
SC 1170, followed.
     Mary Sawards v. The Owner of the "Vera Cruz", [1884] 10
A. C 59 @ 68, quoted with approval.
     (5) In construing the scope of the Corporation's powers
under section  11 (1)  of the  Corporation Act,	 appropriate
importance should be attached to the qualifying word "duly".
When the Corporation seeks to alter the terms and conditions
of transferred	employees, it  must do so in accordance with
law, and  that requires	 it to	pay  proper  regard  to	 the
sanctity of rights-acquired by the "workmen" employees under
settlements or	awards under  the Industrial  Disputes	Act.
[1142 H, 1143 A-B]
     The provision  in section	11(2) has  been made for the
purpose of  protecting the  interests of the Corporation and
its  policy   holders.	The  policy  holders  constitute  an
important and significant sector of public interest. Indeed,
the avowed  object of  the  entire  Corporation	 Act  is  to
provide absolute  security to  the  policy  holders  in	 the
matter of  their life  insurance protection. That is assured
by a  wise management  of the Corporation's business, and by
ensuring that  when settlements	 are negotiated	 between the
Corporation and	 its workmen or when industrial adjudication
is initiated  in Labour	 Court and industrial tribunals, the
protection of  the policy  holders will	 find  appropriately
significant emphasis in the deliberations. [1143 D-E]
     (6) In  the view  that the notification dated 26th May,
1978  purporting  to  amend  the  Standardisation  Order  by
substituting clause  (a) is  invalid and  the newly  enacted
Regulation 58  does not	 effect the  contract in  respect of
bonus embodied	in the	Settlements of 1974 between the Life
Insurance Corporation  and its	"workmen" employees,  effect
must be	 given to that contract. If the terms and conditions
of service  created by the contract need to be reconsidered,
recourse must  be  had	to  the	 modes	recognised  by	law-
negotiated   settlement,    industrial	  adjudication	  or
appropriate legislation. [1143 F-G]
     Per Koshal, J. (Contra) (1) The Industrial Disputes Act
deals  with  the  adjudication	or  settlement	of  disputes
between an employer and his workmen and would, therefore, be
a special  law vis-a-vis  another  statute  which  covers  a
larger	field  and  may	 thus  be  considered  "general"  as
compared to it. It cannot, however, be regarded as a special
law in	relation to  all  other	 laws  irrespective  of	 the
subject matter	dealt with  by them.  In fact  a law  may be
special when  considered in  relation to  another  piece  of
legislation but	 only a general one vis-a-vis still another.
"Special" and  "general" are  relative terms  and it  is the
content of  one statute	 as compared  to the other that will
determine which	 of the	 two is to be regarded as special in
relation to the other. Viewed in this light the proposition,
namely, "the  Industrial  Disputes  Act	 is  a	special	 law
because it deals with adjudication and settlement of matters
in dispute  between an	employer and  his workmen  while the
Life Insurance	Corporation Act	 is a  general	law"  cannot
stand scrutiny.	 The Industrial	 Disputes Act would no doubt
be a special Act in relation to a law which makes provisions
for matters wider than but inclusive of those covered by it,
such as the Indian Contract Act as that is a law relating to
contracts generally  (including those  between an industrial
employer  and	his  workmen)	but  it	  would	 lose	that
categorisation and  must be  regarded as  a general law when
its rival  is shown  to operate in a field narrower than its
own and	 such a	 rival is  that part  of the  Life Insurance
Corporation Act which deals with
1091
conditions of service of the employees of the Life Insurance
Corporation-a single  industrial undertaking  of  a  special
type) as opposed to all others of its kind which fall within
the  ambit   of	 the  Industrial  Disputes  Act.  Where	 the
competition is	between these  two Acts, therefore, the Life
Insurance Corporation  Act must be regarded as a special law
and (in comparison thereto) the Industrial Disputes Act as a
general law. [1153 E-F, H, 1154 A-C]
     (1A) Section 11 and clauses (b) and (bb) of sub-section
2 of  section 49  of the Life Insurance Corporation Act were
intended  to   be  and	 do  constitute	 an  exhaustive	 and
overriding law	governing the  condition of  service of	 all
employees   of	 the   Corporation   including	 transferred
employees.  The	 proposition,  namely  that  the  Industrial
Disputes Act  being a  special law, would override a general
law like  the Life  Insurance Corporation Act, is incorrect.
Even if the Industrial Disputes Act is regarded as a special
law in comparison to the Life Insurance Corporation Act, the
result would be the same. [1162E-F, 1153 E]
     (1B) The  general rule  to be followed in the case of a
conflict between  two statutes	is that	 the later abrogates
the  earlier   one  (Leges   posteriors	 priors	  contrarias
abrogant). To  this general  rule  there  is  a	 well  known
exception,  namely,   generalia	 specialibus   non  derogant
(general things	 do not	 derogate from	special things).  In
other words,  a prior  special law  would yield	 to a  later
general law,  if either	 of the	 following two conditions is
satisfied: (i)	The two	 are inconsistent  with each  other.
(ii) There  is some  express reference	in the	later to the
earlier	 enactment.   If  either   of  these  conditions  is
fulfilled the  later law, even though general, will prevail.
Further four  tests deductible	from the  several  texts  on
interpretation of statutes are : (i) The legislature has the
undoubted right	 to alter  a law  already promulgated  by it
through subsequent  legislation. (ii)  A special  law may be
altered, abrogated  or	repealed  by  a	 later	general	 law
through an express provision. (iii) A later general law will
override a  prior special law if the two are so repugnant to
each other  that they cannot co-exist even though no express
provision in  that behalf  is found in the general law. (iv)
It is only in the absence of a provision to the contrary and
of a  clear inconsistency  that a  special law	will  remain
wholly unaffected by a later general law. [1145 E, G-H, 1156
C-D]
     (2) The  proposition that	the Industrial	Dispute	 Act
being a	 special law  would override  a general law like the
Life Insurance Corporation Act is equally insupportable even
if the	Industrial Disputes Act is regarded as a special law
in connection  with the	 Life Insurance Corporation Act. The
word  "duly",	in  section  11(1)  of	the  Life  Insurance
Corporation Act	 means properly, regularly or in due manner.
In the	context in  which it  is used it may legitimately be
given a	 more restricted meaning, namely, in accordance with
law. If	 reference  to	the  provisions	 of  the  Industrial
Disputes Act  alone was	 contemplated  and  the	 alterations
envisaged were	merely	such  as  could	 be  achieved  by  a
settlement or award resulting from a compliance thereof, not
only  would  the  expression  "by  the	Corporation"  become
redundant (which  would not be a situation conforming to the
well-known principle  of interpretation	 of statutes  that a
construction which  leaves without  effect any	part of	 the
language of  a statute	will normally  be rejected)  but the
express provisions  of clause  (bb) of	sub-section  (2)  of
section 49  of the  Life Insurance  Corporation	 Act,  which
invest	the  Corporation  with	power  to  make	 regulations
(albeit with  the approval of the Central Government) laying
down the  terms and conditions of service of the transferred
employees would also be rendered otiose. To the extent,
1092
therefore, that	 section 11(1) read with that clause confers
on  the	 Corporation  the  power  to  alter  the  terms	 and
conditions in  question-a power	 not enjoyed by it under the
provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act-it is inconsistent
with the  Industrial Disputes  Act and	being a	 later	law,
would override	that Act  despite the  absence of  the	non-
obstante  clause,   the	 inconsistency	having	arisen	from
express language  and not  from mere  implication. In  other
words, sub-section  (2) of  section 11 not only gives to the
Central	 Government   the  power  to  alter  the  terms	 and
conditions of service of the employees of the Corporation in
certain situations,  and to alter them even to the detriment
of such	 employees to  such extent  and in such manner as it
thinks fit, but also states in so many words that such power
shall be  exercisable "notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-section (1)	 or the	 Industrial Disputes  Act 1947 or in
any other  law for the time being in force, or in any Award,
settlement or  agreement for  the time	being in force." The
mandate of  the Legislature  has been expressed in clear and
unambiguous terms  in this non-obstante clause and is to the
effect that  the power	of the	Central Government  to alter
conditions of  service of  the employees  of the Corporation
shall be  wholly unfettered  and that  any provisions to the
contrary contained  in the  Industrial Disputes	 Act or	 for
that matter,  in any  other law for the time being in force,
or in any award, settlement, or agreement for the time being
in force, would not stand in the way of the exercise of that
power even  if such  exercise is  to the  detriment  of	 the
employees of the Corporation. The conferment of the power is
thus in	 express supersession of the Industrial Disputes Act
and of	any settlement	made thereunder.  The provisions  of
that Act  and the  two settlements  of 1974 must, therefore,
yield to  the dictates	of section 11(2) and to the exercise
of the	power conferred	 thereby on  the Central Government.
Further, in  the face  of an express provision, namely, sub-
section (4) of section 11 it is not open to the employees to
contend that  the law  laid down  in the Industrial Disputes
Act and not sub-section (2) of section 11 would govern them.
[1154C, 1157 C-H, 1159 A-E, F-G]
     (3) The  rule making power conferred on the Corporation
by section  49 of  the Life  Insurance	Corporation  Act  is
exercisable notwithstanding the provisions of the Industrial
Disputes Act.  This power  is  expressly  conferred  on	 the
Corporation in	addition to  that with	which it is invested
under clause (bb) of the same sub-section (2) of section 49.
If clauses  (b) and  (bb) of that sub-section were not meant
to override the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act on
the same  subject they	would be completely meaningless, and
that is	 a situation  running directly counter to one of the
accepted principles  of interpretation of statutes. Besides,
these two  clauses are	not to	be read	 in  isolation	from
section 11.  The subject  matter  of  the  clauses  and	 the
section is  overlapping and together they form an integrated
whole. The  clauses must, therefore, be read in the light of
section 11.  When the  two clauses  say that the Corporation
shall have  the power  to frame regulations in regard to the
terms and  conditions of its employees including transferred
employees subject,  of course,	to previous  approval of the
Central Government,  the power	may  well  be  exercised  in
conformity with	 the provisions	 of section 11. And if it so
exercised the  resultant regulations  cannot be	 said to  go
beyond the  limits specified in the statute. [1159 G-H, 1160
A-D]
     Life Insurance  Corporation of  India  v.	Sunil  Kumar
Mukherjee & Ors. [1964] 5 SCR 528, followed.
     Hukam Chand etc. v. Union of India and others, AIR 1972
SC 2427;  B. E. Vadera v. Union of India & Ors. [1968] 3 SCR
575, held inapplicable.
1093
     U. P.  State Electricity  Board and Ors v. Hari Shanker
Jain and  Ors., [1975]	1 SCR  355; Bangalore Water Supply &
Sewerage Board	etc. v.	 R. Rajappa & Ors. [1978] 3 SCR 207,
explained and distinguished.
     (4) Section  23 of	 the L.	 I. C.	Act, which envisages
employment of  persons by  the Corporation  no doubt implies
settlement of  conditions of  service and that does not mean
that once a settlement is arrived at, the same is not liable
to be  altered except  by another  settlement reached  under
section 18  of the I. D. Act. The provisions of sub-sections
(1), (2)  and (4)  of section  11 of  the L.  I. C.  Act and
clauses (b)  and (bb)  of  sub-section	(2)  of	 section  49
thereof have  overriding effect and the terms and conditions
of service  of the employees of the Corporation forming part
of a  settlement under	the I. D. Act cannot last after they
have been altered in exercise of the powers conferred on the
Corporation or	the Central  Government by these provisions,
as was	done when  the new  Regulation 58  was framed  under
section 49  by the  Corporation and  the new  clause  9	 was
inserted in  the 1957  order by	 the Central Government. Nor
can any action taken under section 19(2) and 9A of the I. D.
Act have  any relevance	 to the	 exercise of these powers so
long as such exercise conform to the provisions of the L. I.
C. Act. [1162 G-H, 1163 A-B]
     (5) The  reliance of  the High  Court  on	Madan  Mohan
Pathak v.  Union of  India, [1978] 3 SCR 334, for support to
the proposition	 that "the  new Regulation  58 framed  under
section 49  of the  L. I. C. Act and the notification issued
under sub-section  (2) of  section 11 thereof substituting a
new clause  9 in  the  1957  Order  are	 wholly	 ineffective
against the  operation of  the 1974  settlements which	were
arrived at  in pursuance  of the provisions of the I. D. Act
and which therefore continue to govern the parties thereto",
is wholly misplaced because:
     (a) The  judgment limited itself to the duration of the
settlements as	appearing in clause 12 thereof and therefore
does not cover any period subsequent to 21st March, 1977.
     (b) No finding at all was given nor was any observation
made to	 the effect  that sections 11 and 49 of the L. I. C.
Act or	the action taken thereunder (the promulgation of new
Regulation 58  and the	new clause  9 of the 1957 Order) was
ineffective against  the operation  of the provisions of the
I. D.  Act or of the 1974 settlements. On the other hand the
judgment very  specifically proceeded on the ground that the
two settlements	 had to and did conform to the provisions of
Regulation  58	 inasmuch  as  the  Central  Government	 had
accorded its  approval to  them, (c)  Although it  was	held
clearly, rather	 quite correctly  that	sub-clause  (ii)  of
clause 8 of the 1974 settlements stood independently of sub-
clause	(1)   thereof,	the  judgment  contains	 no  finding
whatsoever to the effect that the conditions of service laid
down in	 those settlement  could be  varied only  by a fresh
settlement or  award made  under the provisions of the I. D.
Act and	 that till  then  sub-clause  (ii)  aforesaid  would
remain in full force. [1165 C-H, 1166 A-B]
     (6) The  observations in  Chako's case must be taken to
mean that  the expired	award would  continue to  govern the
parties till  it is  displaced by  another contract, or by a
relationship otherwise substituted for it in accordance with
law. In	 the present  case, there  is a	 special mandate  by
Parliament to  fill the void of the 3rd period following the
expiry of  1974 settlements  which did not obtain in Chako's
case. [1170 A-C]
     South Indian  Bank Ltd.  v. A.  R. Chacko, [1964] 5 SCR
625, Indian  Link Chain Manufacturers Ltd. v. Their Workmen,
[1972] 1 SCR 790, Shukla
1094
Manseta Industries  Pvt. Ltd.  v. The Workmen Employed under
it. [1978]  1 SCR  249; Haribhau Shinde and another v. F. H.
Lala Industrial	 Tribunal, Bombay and another, AIR 1970 Bom.
213, distinguished.
     Sukhdev  Singh   &	 Ors.	v.  Bhagatram  Sardar  Singh
Raghuvanghi and anr., [1975] 3 SCR 619, followed.
     (7) 1.  Section 11(2)  of the  Corporation Act  suffers
from no ambiguity either by reason of the omission therefrom
of the	expression "from  time to  time" or otherwise and it
is, therefore, not permissible for a reference to be made to
the speech  of the  then Finance  Minister in  the matter of
interpretation of the sections. [1180 B-C]
     Anandji Haridas  & Co.  (P) Ltd. v. Engineering Mazdoor
Sangh & Anr., [1975] 3 SCR 542, applied.
     (7) 2.  The power	to alter the terms and conditions of
service of  the Corporation's  employees which	the  Central
Government is authorised to exercise in the interests of the
Corporation and	 its policy-holders  must of  necessity be a
power which  can  be  exercised	 as  and  when	occasion  so
requires. A  contrary view  would lead	to absurd results in
certain given situations. [1179 A-B]
     Himangsu  Chakraborty  and	 others	 v.  Life  Insurance
Corporation of	India and others, 1977 Lab. I. C. 622; K. S.
Ramaswamy anr.	v. Union of India and ors. [1977] I LLJ 211;
Harivadan K.  Desai and others v. Life Insurance Corporation
of India and others, (1977) Lab. I. C. 1072 (Guj), approved.
     Mazagaon Dock  Ltd. v.  Commissioner of  Income Tax and
Excess Profits Tax, [1959] SCR 848; Babu Manmohan Das Shah &
Ors., v.  Bishun Das,  [1967] 1 SCR 836; Vasantlal Maganbhai
Sanjanwala v.  The State  of Bombay and others, [1961] 1 SCR
341, applied.
     (8) There	being no  challenge to	the vires of section
11(2) of  the Corporation  Act by either side and so long as
the section  itself  is	 good  the  exercise  of  the  power
conferred by it cannot be attacked unless such exercise goes
beyond the  limits of  the section, either in its content or
manner. If  the legislature  was competent to confer a power
on the Central Government to alter the conditions of service
of the	employees of  the Corporation  to their detriment or
otherwise, the fact that the power was exercised only to cut
down bonus  would furnish no reason for striking down clause
9 of  the 1957	Order or Regulation 58 as being isolative of
Article 14 or 19. [1181 E-F]
     (9) Clause	 9 of  the 1957	 Order is  not violative  of
Article 14  or 16  of the Constitution of India. That clause
no doubt  takes within	its sweep only transferred employees
because clause	2 of the 1957 Order specifically states that
the Order  is restricted  in its  operation to	employees of
that category;	but then  no question  of any discrimination
whatsoever is involved inasmuch as the transferred employees
have not  only been treated differently from other employees
of the	Corporation but by reason of Regulation 58 they have
been placed fully at par with the latter. [1181 G-H, 1182 A]
     (10) Clause 9 of the Order of 1957 does not suffer from
the maxim  "Delegatus non-potest  delegare". Clause 9 itself
states in  unmistakable terms that the Corporation may grant
non-profit sharing  bonus to its employees in respect of any
particular year	 subject to  the previous  approval  of	 the
Central Government, and so the real bonus-granting authority
remains the  Central Government. There is thus no delegation
of  any	  real	power	to  the	  Corporation  through	 the
promulgation of clause 9. [1182 B-D]
1095
     (11) New contentions, not raised before the High Court,
like "necessity	 for revising  the terms  and conditions  of
service through	 promulgation  of  clause  9"  will  not  be
permitted to  be raised at the Supreme Court level. Again in
the  absence   of  any	evidence  to  the  contrary,  it  is
permissible  to	  presume  that	  official  acts  have	been
regularly  performed   and  that   the	 preamble   to	 the
notification therefore, is in accord with facts. [1182 E-G]
     12. When  Regulation 2 of 1960 says that it shall apply
to every  whole-time employee  of  the	Corporation  "unless
otherwise provided  by the  terms of any contract, agreement
or letter  of appointment",  all that  it means is that if a
contract, agreement or letter of appointment contains a term
stating that  the concerned  employee or employees shall not
be governed  by	 the  Regulations,  then  such	employee  or
employees  shall   not	be  so	governed.  Regulation  2  is
definitely not	susceptible of	the interpretation that if a
settlement has	been reached between the Corporation and its
employees, the	regulations shall  not apply  to  them	even
though the  settlement makes no provision in that behalf. It
is nobody's  case that the 1974 settlements contain any such
provision and  Regulation 2,  therefore, does  not come into
play at all. [1183 C-E]



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION : Civil Appeal No. 2275 of 1978.

Appeal by Special Leave from the Judgment and Order dated 11-8-1978 of the High Court of Judicature at Lucknow in Writ Petition No. 1186/78.

WITH Transfer Case No. 1 of 1979.

S. V. Gupte, G. B. Pai, K. J. John and D. N. Mishra for the Appellant in C.A. 2275/78.

R. K. Garg, Madan Mohan, V. J. Francis and D. K. Garg for Respondents 1-3, in CA 2275/78.

M. K. Banerjee, Addl. Sol. Genl. R. N. Sachthey, R. B. Datar and Miss A. Subhashini for Respondent No. 4, in C.A. 2275/78.

P. K. Chatterjee and Rathin Das for the Petitioner in Transfer Case No. 1/79.

M. K. Banerjee, Addl. Sol. Genl., R. B. Datar, R. N. Sachthey and Miss A. Subhashini for Respondent No. 1 in Transfer Case No. 1/79.

S. V. Gupte, G. B. Pai and K. J. John for Respondent No. 6 in Transfer Case No. 1/79.

For the Interveners P. K. Chatterjee and Rathin Das for All India Employees Assn. Adarsh Goel, Janardan and Sarwa Mitter for National Organisation of Insurance Workers.

P. R. Kumaramanglam, Mukul Mudgal and K. Vasdev for G. Meenakshi Sundaram and K. Ramakrishnan.

R. K. Garg, Madan Mohan, V. J. Francis and D. K. Garg for C. N. Sharma and Rajendra Nath Misra.

D. L. Sengupta, S. K. Nandy and P. S. Khera for All India Life Insurance Employees Assn. and L.I.C. of India through its Chairman Bombay.

The following Judgments were delivered, KRISHNA IYER, J.

A Word of Explanation.-A preliminary divagation has become necessary since application and enquiries had been made more than once about the postponement of the judgment. The first anniversary of the closure of oral submissions in the above case is just over; and this unusual delay between argument and judgment calls from me, the presiding judge of the bench which heard the case, a word of explanation and clarification so that misunderstanding about the judges may melt away in the light. A better appreciation of this court's functional adversities and lack of research facilities will promote more compassion than criticism and in that hope I add this note.

The judicature, like other constitutional instrumentalities, has a culture of national accountability. Two factors must be highlighted in this context. A court is more than a judge; a collegium has a personality which exceeds its members. The price a collective process (free from personality cult, has to pay is long patience, free exchange and final decision in conformity with the democracy of judicial functionality. Sometimes, when divergent strands of thought haunt the mentations of the members, we pause, ponder and reconsider because we follow the words of Oliver Cromwell commended for courts by Judge Learned Hand: "My brethren, I beseech you, in the bowels of Christ, think it possible that you may be mistaken." Utter incompatibility exists between judicial democracy and dogmatic infallibility; and so, in this case, we have taken time, more time and repeated extension of time to evolve a broad consensus out of our initial dissensus. Not procrastination but plural toil, is the hidden truth behind the considerable interval.

Secondly, when important issues demand the court's collective judgment an informed meeting of instructed minds, in many ways, is a sine qua non. But the torrent of litigation flooding the court drowns the judges in the daily drudgery of accumulated dockets. To gain leisure for fundamental reflections with some respite from paper-logged existence and supportive research from trained law clerks is a consummation devoutly to be wished' if the final court is to fulfil its tryst with the Constitution and country. The Indian judicial process, sui generis in some respects, has its problems, Himalayan in dimension but hardly appreciated in perspective and in true proportions two of which have been mentioned by me in extension of the great gap between closure for judgment and its actual pronouncement. Having said this, I must proceed to deal with the merits of the case and the conclusions we have reached in our diverse opinions. By majority, any way, we dismiss the appeal and find no merit in the contentions of the appellant. The fundamental differences in approach My learned brother Koshal, J. has, after long reflection on the issues in this appeal, expressed his conclusion with which I respectfully disagree. Our difference stems from basic divergence in legal interpretation and judicial perspective.

Law is no cold-blooded craft bound by traditional techniques and formal forceps handed down to us from the Indo-Anglican era but a warm-blooded art, with a break from the past and a tryst with the present, deriving its soul force from the Constitution enacted by the People of India. Law, as Vice President G. S. Pathak used to emphasise in several lectures, is a tool to engineer a peaceful `civil revolution' one of the components of which is a fair deal to the weaker human sector like the working class. The striking social justice values of the Constitution impact on the interpretation of Indian laws and to forget this essential postulate while relying on foreign erudition is to weaken the vital flame of the Democratic, Socialist Republic of India. Chief Justice Earl Warren of the United States has spelt out with clarity and felicity the correct judicial approach to the issues at stake in this case:

Our judges are not monks or scientists, but participants in the living stream of our national life, steering the law between the dangers of rigidity on the one hand and of formlessness on the other. Our system faces no theoretical dilemma but a single continuous problems how to apply ever-changing conditions the never-changing principles of freedom. (1) For the Indian judicial process, the nidus of these never- changing principles is the Constitution. The bearing of this broad observation on statutory construction will become evident as we get down to the discussion.
Now let me proceed to the merits, but, at the outset, underscore the constitutional bias towards social justice to the weaker sections. including the working class, in the Directive Principles of State Policy-a factor which must enliven judicial consciousness while decoding the meaning of legislation. Victorian-vintage rules of construction cannot override this value-laden guide book.
The flawless flow of facts, so far as I am able to remember, aided by our notes, finds expression in the stream of narration in our learned brother's judgment and that frees me from a like exercise. But our consensus on the facts is no less than our dissensus on the law. In the pages that follow I adopt, for convenience, the same acronyms and abbreviations as have been used by brother Koshal, J. in his judgment.
To begin with, I have to stress three key circumstances which colour the vision of social justice: (a) the factum of payment of bonus, without break, since 1959 by the Corporation(1) to its employees, (b) the consciousness that the Management in this case is no asocial, purely profit- oriented private enterprise but a model employer, a statutory corporation, created by nationalisation legislation inspired by socialistic objectives; and (c) the importance of industrial peace for securing which a special legislation viz. the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (the ID Act, for short) has been in operation for 33 years. The Corporation is itself a limb of the State as defined in Art. 12 and Arts. 38, 39 and 43 which deal with workers' weal have, therefore, particular significance.
The Corporation, to begin with, had to take over the staff of the private insurers lest they should be thrown out of employment, on nationalisation. These private companies had no homogeneous policy regarding conditions of service for their personnel, but when these heterogeneous crowds under the same management (the Corporation) divergent emoluments and other terms of service could not survive and broad uniformity became a necessity. Thus, the statutory transfer of service from former employers and standardization of scales of remuneration and other conditions of employment had to be and were taken care of by s. 11 of the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956 (for short, the LIC Act). The obvious purpose of this provision was to enable the Corporation initially to absorb the motley multitudes from many companies who carried with them varying incidents of service so as to fit them into a fair pattern, regardless of their antecedent contracts of employment or industrial settle-

ments or awards. It was elementary that the Corporation could not perpetuate incongruous features of service of parent insurers, and statutory power had to be vested to vary, modify or supersede these contracts, geared to fair, equitable and, as far as possible, uniform treatment of the transferred staff. Unless there be unmistakable expression of such intention, the ID Act will continue to apply to the Corporation employees. The office of s. 11 of the LIC Act was to provide for a smooth take-over and to promote some common conditions of service in a situation where a jungle of divergent contracts of employment and industrial awards or settlements confronted the State. Unless such rationalisation and standardization were evolved the ensuing chaos would itself have spelt confusion, conflicts and difficulties. This functional focus of s.11 of the LIC Act will dispel scope for interpretative exercises unrelated to the natural setting in which the problem occurs. The inference is clear that s.11 does not repel the ID Act as that is not its purpose. Farewell to the context and fanatical adherence to the text may lead to the tyranny of literality-a hazardous road which misses the meaning or reaches a sense which the author never meant. Lord Denning has observed : "A judge should not be a servant of the words used. He should not be a mere mechanic in the power-house of semantics." Reed Dickerson has in his "The Interpretation and Application of Statutes" warned against `the disintegration of statutory construction' and quoted Fuller to say :(1) ....(W)e do not proceed simply by placing the word in some general context.... Rather, we ask ourselves, What can this rule be for? What evil does it seek to avert?

....Surely the judicial process is something more than a cataloguing procedure.

....a rule or statute has a structural or systematic quality that reflects itself in some measure into the meaning of every principal term in it. I lay so much emphasis on the guidelines to statutory interpretation as this case turns solely on the seeming meaning of certain provisions (for e.g. s. 11) of the LIC Act as capable of perpetual use, not only initial exercise, as the Minister in Parliament indicated. But, as we will presently see, the decisive aspect of the case turns on another point, viz. the competing claims for dominance as between the ID Act and the LIC Act in areas of conflict. Of course, the problem of decoding the legislative intent is fraught with perils and pitfalls, as the learned author has noted :

To do his cognitive job well, a judge must be unbiased, sensitive to language usages and shared tacit assumptions, perceptive in combining relevant elements affecting meaning, capable of reasoning deductively, and generously endowed with good judgment. In view of these formidable demands, it is hardly surprising that judges often disagree on the true meaning of a statute. Even so, legal engineering, in the province of deciphering meaning, cannot abandon the essay in despair and I shall try to unlock the legislative intent in the light of the text and as reflecting the context.
A capsulated presentation of the conspectus of facts will aid the discussion.
The battle is about current bonus, the employer is the Life Insurance Corporation and the employees belong to Classes III and IV in the service of the Corporation. The LIC Act brought into being a statutory corporation, i.e. the Life Insurance Corporation and life was breathed into it as from September 1, 1956. Since there was nationalisation of life insurance business under the LIC Act private insurers' assets and liabilities of employees were transferred to the Corporation. We are concerned only with the employees and their services and s.11 of the LIC Act covers this field. I may extract the said provision to make it clear that it deals with the remuneration, terms and conditions and other rights and privileges of transferred employees :
11.(1) Every whole-time employee of an insurer whose controlled business has been transferred to and vested in the Corporation and who was employed by the insurer wholly or mainly in connection with his controlled business immediately before the appointed day shall, on and from the appointed day, become an employee of the Corporation, and shall hold his office therein by the same tenure, at the same remuneration and upon the same terms and conditions and with the same rights and privileges as to pension and gratuity and other matters as he would have held the same on the appointed day if this Act had not been passed, and shall continue to do so unless and until his employment in the Corporation is terminated or until his remuneration, terms and conditions are duty altered by the Corporation :
Provided that nothing contained in this sub- section shall apply to any such employee who has, by notice in writing given to the Central Government prior to the appointed day, intimated his intention of not becoming an employee of the Corporation. (2) Where the Central Government is satisfied that for the purpose of securing uniformity in the scales of remuneration and the other terms and conditions of service applicable to employees of insurers whose controlled business has been transferred to, and vested in, the Corporation, it is necessary so to do, or that, in the interests of the Corporation and its policyholders, a reduction in the remuneration payable, or a revision of the terms and conditions of service applicable, to employees or any class of them is called for, the Central Government may, notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), or in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, or in any other law for the time being in force, or in any award, settlement or agreement for the time being in force, alter (whether by way of reduction or otherwise) the remuneration and the other terms and conditions of service to such extent and in such manner as it thinks fit; and if the alteration is not acceptable to any employee, the Corporation may terminate his employment by giving him compensation equivalent to three months' remuneration unless the contract of service with such employee provides for a shorter notice of termination.
Explanation.-The compensation payable to an employee under this sub-section shall be in addition to, and shall not affect, any pension, gratuity, provident fund money or any other benefit to which the employee may be entitled under his contract of service.

(3) If any question arises as to whether any person was a whole-time employee of an insurer or as to whether any employee was employed wholly or mainly in connection with the controlled business of an insurer immediately before the appointed day the question shall be referred to the Central Government whose decision shall be final.

(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, or in any other law for the time being in force, the transfer of the service of any employee of an insurer to the Corporation shall not entitle any such employee to any compensation under that Act or other law, and no such claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority.

Recruitment of fresh employees is provided for by s.23. And s.49 empowers the Corporation to make regulations in a general way for all the purposes of the Act, including the terms and conditions of service of the employees of the Corporation. Pursuant to its powers the Central Government promulgated the Life Insurance Corporation (Alteration of Remuneration and other Terms and Conditions of Service of Employees) Order 1957 (the 1957 Order, for short). This related to the conditions of service of the transferees and was not confined only to Class III and Class IV employees among them. It was a general Order, not one limited to workmen as defined in s.2(s) of the ID Act. Clause 9 of the 1957 Order states that no bonus will be paid but certain other benefits of insurance, medical care etc., are mentioned therein. Clause 9 was later amended providing for non-profit sharing bonus to certain classes of employees.

Be that as it may, the Corporation, with the clear approval of the Central Government, reached a settlement with its employees on July 2, 1959 providing for payment of cash bonus from September 1, 1956 to December 31, 1961. Obviously, this was under the ID Act and not under the LIC Act and proceeded on the clear assumption that the ID Act provisions regarding claims of bonus applied to workmen in the employment of the Corporation.

In 1960, the Life Insurance Corporation of India (Staff) Regulations, 1960 (the 1960 Regulations) were framed. Regulation 58 states:

The Corporation may, subject to such directions as the Central Government may issue, grant non-profit sharing bonus to its employees and the payment thereof, including conditions of eligibility for the bonus, shall be regulated by instructions issued by the Chairman from time to time.
Here again, it must be noted that the provision is general and covers the entire gamut of employees of the Corporation and is not a specific stipulation regarding that class of employees who are workmen under the ID Act and whose industrial disputes will be governed ordinarily by the ID Act.
Consistently with the good relations between the Corporation and its workmen, the settlement of 1959 was followed by those of 1963, 1970 and 1972 providing for bonus for workmen in the service of the Corporation. Rocketing cost of living, rising aspirations and frustrations of socioeconomic life and the general expectations from model employers like the public sector enterprises, have led workmen in this country to make escalating demands for better emoluments, including bonus. Naturally, the workmen under the Corporation raised disputes for bonus and other improved conditions. The employer, consistently with the long course of conduct by both sides as if the ID Act did govern their relations, entered into settlements dated January 24, 1974 and February 6, 1974, pursuant to the provisions of s.18 read with s.2(p) of the ID Act. Clause 8 of these settlements specificated the scale of bonus and clause 12 thereof is more general and may be read here:
Clause 8. Bonus:
(i) No profit sharing bonus shall be paid.
However, the corporation may, subject to such directions as the Central Government issue from time to time, grant any other kind of bonus to its Class III and IV employees.

(ii) An annual cash bonus will be paid to Class III and Class IV employees at the rate of 15% of the annual salary (i.e. basic pay inclusive of special pay, if any, and dearness allowance and additional dearness allowance) actually drawn by an employee in respect of the financial year to which the bonus relates.

(iii) Save as provided herein all other terms and conditions attached to the admissibility and payment of bonus shall be as laid down in the Settlement on bonus dated the 26th June 1972.

Clause 12:

(1) This settlement shall be effective from 1st April 1973, and shall be for a period of four years, i.e., from 1st April, 1973 to 31st March, 1977. (2) The terms of the settlement shall be subject to the approval of the Board of the Corporation and the Central Government.
(3) This Settlement disposes of all the demands raised by the workmen for revision of terms and conditions of their service.
(4) Except as otherwise provided or modified by this Settlement, the workmen shall continue to be governed by all the terms and conditions of service as set forth and regulated by the Life Insurance Corporation of India (Staff Regulations), 1960 as also the administrative instructions issued from time to time and they shall, subject to the provisions thereof including any period of operation specified therein, be entitled to the benefits thereunder.
It is important and, indeed, is an impressive feature that these two settlements cover a wide ground of which bonus is but one item.

Equally significant is the fact that the Board of the Corporation and the Central Government, which presumably knew the scope of the LIC Act and the ID Act, did approve of these settlements.

The thought of terminating the payment of bonus to the employees covered by the 1974 settlements apparently occurred to the Central Government a year later and the Payment of Bonus (Amendment) Ordinance, 1975, (replaced by the Payment of Bonus (Amendment) Act, 1976), was brought into force to extinguish the effect of the 1974 settlements and the claims for bonus put forward by the workers thereunder. This Act was successfully challenged and this court struck down the said legislation in Madan Mohan Pathak v. Union of India(1) and directed the Corporation to pay to its Class III and IV employees bonus for the years 1-4-1975 to 31-3-1977. Thereupon, the Corporation issued to its workmen certain notices under s.19(2) of the ID Act and s.9A of the same Act. Likewise, the Central Government, on May 26, 1978, issued a notification under s.49 of the LIC Act substituting a new Regulation for the old Regulation 58. All these three steps were taken to stop payment of bonus to the workmen under the two settlements and led to a challenge of their validity in the Allahabad High Court under Art. 226 of the Constitution. If the two notices and the changed Regulation were good they did deprive the workmen of their benefits of bonus pursuant to the settlements reached under the ID Act. But the workmen contended that the proceedings under the LIC Act could not prevail against the continued flow of bonus benefits under the ID Act. The High Court (Lucknow Bench) struck down the appellant's actions as of no consequence and void and sustained the claim for bonus based on the settlements of 1974. The Corporation has come up in appeal to this Court assailing the findings of the High Court.

The Corporation is clearly an 'industry', and the 'workmen' raised demands for bonus, the management responded constructively and for long years settlements, as envisioned by the ID Act, were entered into and the stream of industrial peace flowed smooth. Industrial settlements marked their relations the last of which were in 1974 but a later legislation marred this situation and led to a litigation. In 1976, the Life Insurance Corporation (Modification of Settlement) Act, 1976 (for short, the 1976 Act) was enacted to abolish the efficacy of the right to bonus under the two settlements of 1974 but the challenge to its constitutionality was upheld. When the parliamentary burial of bonus was stultified by judicial resurrection, other measures to effectuate the same purpose were resorted to, both under the LIC Act and the ID Act. These moves proved to be essays in futility because the High Court held that bonus was still payable, that the ID Act prevailed over the LIC Act in the area of industrial relations, the former being a special law, and that the steps taken both by the Corporation and the Central Government under the LIC Act and Regulations as well as under the ID Act, were of legal inconsequence. Against this judgment the Corporation has come up in appeal and the questions raised are of great moment and of serious portent. If law allows administrative negation of bonus, judges are not to reason why; but whether law does allow nullification of industrial settlement is for judges to decide, not for the Administration to say, why not? That is Montesquien functionalism of sorts. So, against this backdrop, I will analyse the submissions, scan their substance and pronounce upon their validity.

I may as well formulate, in more particularised form, the various contentions urged on either side-not exhaustively though, because that has been done by my learned brothers. I propose to confine the discussion to the decisive issues. First of all, we have to investigate whether the two settlements of January 24, 1974 and February 6, 1974, arrived at in pursuance of the provisions of s. 18 read with s. 2(p) of the ID Act, have current validity, having regard to the notice given by the Management under s. 19(2) of the ID Act terminating the settlements and under s. 9A of its intention to vary the conditions of service bearing on bonus. In case the settlements do not survive the notices, the claim to bonus perishes and nothing more remains to be decided. But in case I hold that despite the intention to change the service conditions under s. 9A and determination under s. 19(2), the terms of the settlements continue to operate until substituted by a new contract arrived at by mutual settlement or by an award, the further issue opens as to whether a settlement under the ID Act cannot be operative since the LIC Act contains provisions vesting power in the Corporation and the Central Government to fix the terms and conditions of service of the Corporation employees and that power has been exercised to extinguish the bonus claim. The question will throw open for consideration which statute prevails-the ID Act or the LIC Act-when there is an apparent conflict between the two. The problem of the prevalence of a special statute at against a general statute and the determination of which, in a given situation, is the special statute will engage my attention at the appropriate stage. In the event of my holding that the ID Act prevails, as against the LIC Act, in the given situation, the fate of the steps taken by the Corporation and the Central Government under the LIC Act and the Regulations framed thereunder will be sealed. Of course, if the holding is that the ID Act cannot operate as against the LIC Act and the Regulations framed thereunder, when dealing with the terms and conditions of service of the employees of the Corporation, I may have to venture into the controversy about how effectual are the measures taken by the two statutory authorities, i.e. the Corporation and the Central Government, under the provisions of the LIC Act and the Regulations. Every point has been emphatically contested and argued by both sides with erudite niceties. However, the judicial perspective will be the decisive factor in the ultimate analysis. For, as Brennan, J. has observed: (1) "The law is not an end in itself, nor does it provide ends. It is preeminently a means to serve what we think is right."

"Law is here to serve ! To serve what ? To serve, insofar as law can properly do so, within limits that I have already stressed, the realization of man's ends, ultimate and mediate. . . Law cannot stand aside from the social changes around it."
Judicial acceptance of social dynamics, as projected by the Constitution, is the crucial factor in this case, if I may anticipate myself.

The ID Act is a benign measure which seeks to pre-empt are extant even after the notice under s.9A and the formal termination under s. 19(2) of the ID Act, Let me go to the basics. Before that, a glance at the nature of the two settlements, their ambit and ambience and their longevity, actual and potential, may be desirable, after sketching the broad basics of the ID Act and its means and ends.

The ID Act is a benign measure which seeks to pre-empt industrial tensions, provides the mechanics of dispute resolutions and set up the necessary infra-structure so that the energies of partners in production may not be dissipated in counter-productive battles and assurance of industrial justice may create a climate of goodwill. Industrial peace is a national need and, absent law, order in any field will be absent. Chaos is the enemy of creativity sans which production will suffer. Thus, the great goal to which the ID Act is geared is legal mechanism for canalising conflicts along conciliatory or adjudicatory processes. The objective of this legislation and the component of social justice it embodies were underscored in the Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board v. Rajappa (2) thus:

To sum up, the personality of the whole statute, be it remembered, has a welfare basis, it being a beneficial legislation which protects labour, promotes their contentment and regulates situations of crisis and tension where production may be imperilled by untenable strikes and blackmail lock-outs. The mechanism of the Act is geared to conferment of regulated benefits to workmen and resolution, according to a sympathetic rule of law, of the conflicts, actual or potential, between managements and workmen. Its goal is amelioration of the conditions of workers, tempered by a practical sense of peaceful co-existence, to the benefit of both-not a neutral position but restraints on Iaissez faire and concern for the welfare of the weaker lot Empathy with the statute is necessary to understand not merely its spirit, but also its sense. The ID Act deals with industrial disputes, provides for conciliation, adjudication and settlements and regulates the rights of parties and the enforcement of awards and settlements. When a reference is made of a dispute under s.10 or s.10A, the legal process springs into action. Under s.11 and award is made after a regular hearing if a conciliation under s.12 does not ripen into a settlement and a failure report is received. The award is published under s.17(1) and acquires finality by virtue of s.17(2) unless under s.17A(1) the appropriate government declares that the award shall not be enforceable. Section 17A(4) which is of significance reads thus:
(4) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1) and sub-section (3) regarding the enforceability of an award, the award shall come into operation with effect from such date as may be specified therein, but where no date is so specified, it shall come into operation on the date when the award becomes enforceable under sub-section (1) or sub-section (3), as the case may be.
It is obvious from s. 18 that a settlement, like an award, is also binding. What I emphasise is that an award, adjudicatory or arbitral, and a settlement during conciliation or by agreement shall be binding because of statutory sanction. Section 19 relates to the period of operation of settlements and awards and here also it is clear that both settlements and awards, as is evident from a reading of s. 19(2) and (6), stand on the same footing.

Section 19 has a key role to play in the life and death of awards and settlements and so we may read the text here to enable closer comment. Particular attention must be riveted on s. 19(2), (3) and (6):

19. (1) A settlement shall come into operation on such date as is agreed upon by the parties to the dispute, and if no date is agreed upon, on the date on which the memorandum of the settlement is signed by the parties to the dispute.
(2) Such settlement shall be binding for such period as is agreed upon by the parties, and if no such period is agreed upon for a period of six months (from the date on which the memorandum of settlement is signed by the parties to the dispute, and shall continue to be binding on the parties after the expiry of the period aforesaid, until the expiry of two months from the date on which a notice in writing of an intention to terminate the settlement is given by one of the parties to the other party or parties to the settlement.

(3) An award shall, subject to the provisions of this sections remain in operation for a period of one year (from the date on which the award becomes enforceable under section 17A).

Provided that the appropriate Government may reduce the said period and fix such period as it thinks fit;

Provided further that the appropriate Government may before the expiry of the said period, extend the period of operation by any period not exceeding one year at a time as it thinks fit so, however, that the total period of operation of any award does not exceed three years from the date on which it came into operation.

(4) Where the appropriate Government, whether of its own motion or on the application of any party bound by the award, considers that since the award was made, there has been a material change in the circumstances on which it was based, the appropriate Government may refer the award or a part of it to a Labour Court, if the award was that of a Labour Court or to a Tribunal, if the award was that of a Tribunal or of a National Tribunal, for a decision whether the period of operation should not, by reasons of such change, be shortened and the decision of Labour Court or the Tribunal, as the case may be on such reference shall be final.

(5) Nothing contained in sub-section (3) shall apply to any award which by its nature, terms or other circumstances does not impose, after it has been given effect to any continuing obligation on the parties bound by the award.

(6) Notwithstanding the expiry of the period of operation under sub-section (3), the award shall continue to be binding on the parties until a period of two months has elapsed from the date on which notice is given by any party bound by the award to the other party or parties intimating its intention to terminate the award.

(7) No notice given under sub-section (2) or sub- section (6) shall have effect, unless it is given to a party representing the majority of persons bound by the settlement or award, as the case may be.

Section 9A fetters the Management's right to change the conditions of service of workmen in respect of certain matters including wages and allowances. We had better read it here:

9A. No employer who proposes to effect any change in the conditions of service applicable to any workman in respect of any matter specified in the Fourth Schedule, shall effect such change,-
(a) without giving to the workmen likely to be affected by such change a notice in the prescribed manner of the nature of the change proposed to be effected; or
(b) within twenty-one days of giving such notice:
It will be apparent that the ID Act substantially equates an award with a settlement, from the point of view of their legal force. No distinction in regard to the nature and period of their effect can be discerned, especially when we read s. 19(2) and (6). I highlight this virtual identity of effect to bring home the fact that judicial pronouncements on this aspect, whether rendered in a case of award or settlement, will be a guideline for us and nothing turn on whether the particular is one of an award or settlement. Indeed, there are reported cases on both.
The statutory regulation of industrial disputes is comprehensive, as is manifest from the rest of the Act. Chapter V prohibits strikes and lock-outs; Chapter VA deals with lay-off and retrenchment and Chapter VI puts teeth into the provisions by enacting penalties. Importantly, s. 29, which proceeds on the footing of equal sanctity for awards and settlements, punishes breaches:
29. Any person who commits a breach of any term of any settlement or award, which is binding on him under this Act shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both, and where the breach is a continuing one, with a further fine which may extend to two hundred rupees for every day during which the breach continues after the conviction for the first, and the Court trying the offence, if it fines the offender, may direct that the whole or any part of the fine realised from him shall be paid, by way of compensation, to any person who, in its opinion has been injured by such breach.
There are miscellaneous provisions to take care of other residuary matters and we get picture of a parliamentary project designed to deal, not piecemeal but wholesale, with a special subject of strategic concern to the nation, viz., 'the investigation and settlement of industrial disputes'. Let us be perspicacious about the purpose and sensitive about the social focus of the ID Act in a developmental perspective. Parliament has picked out the specific subject of industrial disputes for particularised treatment, whether the industry be in the private or public sector or otherwise. Our country, with so much leeway to make up, cannot afford paralysing processes in production of goods and services and whoever be the employer-Government, quasi-public, charitable or profit- making private enterprise-both sides viz., workmen and management shall abide by the discipline adopting the mechanics and using the machinery under the ID Act. The Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board case(1) has highlighted this core truth. To lose sight of the spinal nature of the legislation, viz., industrial disputes and their settlement through law, and to regard it as a mere enactment bearing on terms and conditions of service in enterprises is to miss the distinctive genre, particular flavour and legislative quintessence of the ID Act.

....(Interpretation) involves far more than picking out dictionary definitions of words or expressions used. Consideration of the context and the setting is indispensable properly to ascertain a meaning. In saying that a verbal expression is plain or un ambiguous, we mean little more than that we are convinced that virtually anyone competent to understand it, and desiring fairly and impartially to ascertain its signification, would attribute to the expression in its context a meaning such as the one we derive rather than any other; and would consider any different meaning, by comparison, strained, or farfetched, or unusual, or unlikely.

... Implicit in the finding of a plain, clear meaning of an expression in its context, is a finding that such meaning is rational and "makes sense" in that context.(1) Interpretative insight will suffer, even as the judicial focus will blur, if the legislative target is not sharply perceived. Indeed, I lay so much stress on this facet because brother Koshal's otherwise faultless logic has, if I may say so with great deference, failed to convince me because of this fundamental mis-focus. To repeat for emphasis, the meat of the statute is industrial dispute, not conditions of employment or contract of service as such. The line of distinction may be fine but is real.

Be that as it may, a bird's eye view of the ID Act reveals the statutory structure and legal engineering centering round dispute settlement in industries according to the rule of law and away from fight with fists or economic blackmail. This large canvas once illumined, may illustrate the sweep, of awards and settlements by reference to the very agreement of 1974 we have before us. It goes far beyond bonus and embraces a wide range of disputes and rainbow of settlements in a spirit of give and take. One may visualise the bargaining process. Give in a little on bonus and get a better deal on salary scale or promotion prospects; relent a wee-bit on hours of work but bargain better on housing facilities, and so on. The soul of the statute is not contract of employment, uniformity of service conditions or recruitment rules, but conscionable negotiations, conciliations and adjudications of disputes and differences animated by industrial justice, to avoid a collision which may spell chaos and imperil national effort at increasing the tempo of production.

If there is no dispute, the ID Act is out of bounds, while the LIC Act applies generally to all employees from the fattest executive to the frailest manual worker and has no concern with industrial disputes. The former is a 'war measure' as it were; the latter is a routine power when swords are not drawn if we may put it metaphorically. When disputes break out or are brewing, a special, sensitive situation fraught with frayed tempers and fighting postures springs into existence, calling for special rules of control, conciliatory machinery, demilitarising strategies and methods of investigation, interim arrangements and final solutions, governed by special criteria for promoting industrial peace and justice. The LIC Act is not a law for employment or disputes arising therefrom, but a nationalisation measure which incidentally, like in any general take-over legislation, provides for recruitment, transfers, promotions and the like. It is special vis-a-vis nationalisation of life insurance but general regarding contracts of employment or acquiring office buildings. Emergency measures are special, for sure. Regular nationalisation statutes are general even if they incidentally refer to conditions of service.

The anatomy of the 1974 settlements is no more confined to bonus than the physiology of man is limited to bones. It is an integral, holistic and delicately balanced ensemble of clauses, with cute calculations and hard bargaining on many matters. To dissect is to murder, in the art of true poetry as in the craft of settlement in industry; and therefore, it is impermissible to single out a clause and extinguish it as the totality is a living entity which does not permit of dismemberment, limb by limb, without doing violence to the wholeness and identity of the settlement. Here, the 1974 settlements have brought about a conflict-resolution on a variety of items including (a) scales of pay, (b) method of fixation in the new scales, (c) dearness allowance, (d) house rent allowance, (e) city compensatory allowance, etc. Thus bonus is but one component of a multi-point agreement. Para 12 of the Settlement has some significance:

12. Period of Settlement.-(1) This Settlement shall be effective from 1st April, 1973 and shall be for a period of four years, i.e., from 1st April, 1973 to 31st March, 1977.
(2) The terms of the settlement shall be subject to the approval of the Board of the Corporation and the Central Government.

(3) This Settlement disposes of all the demands raised by the workmen for revision of terms and conditions of their service.

(4) Except as otherwise provided or modified by this Settlement, the workmen shall continue to be governed by all the terms and conditions of service as set forth and regulated by the Life Insurance Corporation of India (Staff) Regulations, 1960 as also the administrative instructions issued from time to time and they shall, subject to the provisions thereof including any period of operation specified therein, be entitled to the benefits thereunder.

Likewise, the preamble has a purpose:

WHEREAS the parties representing the workmen, namely:
1. All India Insurance Employees Association;
2. All India LIC Employees Federation;
3. All India Life Insurance Employees Association and
4. National Organisation of Insurance Workers.
(hereinafter called the said Associations) submitted their Charter of Demands to the Life Ins. Corpn. of India (hereinafter called the Corporation) for revision of the scales of pay, allowances and other terms and conditions of service after the expiry of the award of the National Industrial Tribunal New Delhi on 31st March, 1973:

AND WHEREAS the Corpn. has carried on negotiations with the said Associations between the period July 1973 and January 1974 at which there has been free and frank exchange of views in regard to various matters including the obligations of the Corpn. to the policy- holders and the community;
AND WHEREAS the said Associations solemnly agree to cooperate with the management in maintaining discipline and in its endeavour to effect utmost economy in administration and to improve efficiency and productivity so as to ensure that the growth in profitability is maintained which alone will enable the Corpn. (i) to safeguard and (ii) to meet the legitimate demands of the employees for wage revision. AND WHEREAS the said Associations further agree that the management may issue administrative instructions in the interest of maintaining discipline and peaceful atmosphere in the office.
NOW THEREFORE it is hereby agreed by and between the parties hereto is as follows:
What stand out prominently in this Memorandum of Settlement are:
(a) There was a previous settlement and new negotiations were started in the light of new demands for a substitutions of the earlier settlement by a new settlement without leaving an interregnum of vacuum.
(b) There was a plurality of items unconnected with bonus as such and the overall settlement is a composite fabric; and
(c) There is specific reference to the LIC (Staff) Regulations, 1960, and, so far as the Settlement provided, it prevailed over the Regulations and so far as the Settlement did not cover a topic the Regulations governed, thus making it clear that the Settlements did not become subordinate to the Regulations.
The core question that first falls for consideration is as to whether the Settlements of 1974 are still in force. There are three stages or phases with different legal effects in the life of an award or settlement. There is a specific period contractually or seatutorily fixed as the period of operation. Thereafter, the award or settlement does not become non est but continues to be binding. This is the second chapter of legal efficacy but qualitatively different as we will presently show. Then comes the last phase. If notice of intention to terminate is given under s. 19(2) or 19(6) then the third stage opens where the award or the settlement does survive and is in force between the parties as a contract which has superseded the earlier contract and subsists until a new award or negotiated settlement takes its place. Like Nature, Law abhors a vacuum and even on the notice of termination under s. 19(2) or (6) the sequence and consequence cannot be just void but a continuance of the earlier terms, but with liberty to both sides to raise disputes negotiate settlements or seek a reference and award. Until such a new contract or award replaces the previous one, the former settlement or award will regulate the relations between the parties. Such is the understanding of industrial law atleast for 30 years as precedents of the High Courts and of this court bear testimony. To hold to the contrary is to invite industrial chaos by an interpretation of the ID Act whose primary purpose is to obviate such a situation and to provide for industrial peace. To distil from the provisions of s. 19 a conclusion diametrically opposite of the objective, intendment and effect of the Section is an interpretative stultification of the statutory ethos and purpose. Industrial law frowns upon a lawless void and under general law the contract of service created by an award or settlement lives so long as a new lawful contract is brought into being. To argue otherwise is to frustrate the rule of law. If law is a means to an end-order in society-can it commit functional harakiri by leaving a conflict situation to lawless void ?

Now we will move on to the precedents on the point which have been summed up by Malhotra thus:(1) (3) Effect of termination of award under s. 19(6) on rights and obligations of parties.-Termination of an award by either party under s. 19(6) does not have the effect of extinguishing the rights flowing therefrom. The effect of termination of an award is only to prevent thereafter the enforcement of the obligation under it in the manner prescribed, but the rights and obligations which flow from it are not wiped out. Evidently, by the termination of an award, the contract of employment is not terminated, the obligations created by the award or contract could be altered by a fresh adjudication or fresh contract.(1).

In Judhisthir Chandra v. Mukherjee(2) the position as stated above was accepted as correct by the High Court. A Division Bench of the Bombay High Court in Mangaldas Narandas v. Payment of Wages Authority etc.(3) (Shah and Gokhale, JJ) came to the same conclusion and neatly summed up the sequence of triple stages and the difference in legal consequences, and upholding the contention that even after termination of an award under s. 19(6) the terms incorporated in the award continued as a contract between the parties. So much so, no reversion to the pre-award position was permissible on the part of the employer. The head-note which is sufficiently lucid and luminous, sums up the ratio thus:

Where an award is delivered by the industrial tribunal it has the effect of imposing a statutory contract governing the relations of the employer and the employe. It is true that statutory contract may be terminated in the manner prescribed by s. 19(6) of the Industrial Disputes Act. After the statutory contract is terminated by notice, the employer by failing to abide by the terms of the award does not incur the penalties provided by the Industrial Disputes Act, nor could the award be enforced in the manner prescribed by s. 20 of the Industrial Disputes (Appellate Tribunal) Act, 1950. But the termination of the award has not the effect of extinguishing the rights flowing therefrom. Evidently by the termination of the award the contract of employment is not terminated. The employer and the employee remain master and servant in the industry in which they are employed, unless by notice the employer has also simultaneously with the termination of the award terminated the employment of the employee. If the employment is not terminated, it is difficult to hold that the rights which had been granted under the award automomatically cease to be effective from the date on which notice of termination of the award becomes effective. The effect of termination of the award is only to prevent enforcement of the obligations under the award in the manner prescribed, but the rights and obligations which flow from the award are not wiped out. Termination of the award or lapsing of the award has not the effect of wiping out the liabilities flowing under the award.
An award has the effect of imposing fresh terms upon the contract of employment between the employer and the employee to which they have been assented. The termination of such award does not terminate the contract. Even after the award is terminated in the manner provided by s. 19(6) of the Industrial Disputes Act, the obligation created by the award could be alter by a fresh contract or a fresh adjudication under the Industrial Disputes Act and not otherwise. The Industrial Disputes Act has been enacted with the object of securing harmonious relations in the working of the industry between the employer and the employees by providing a machinery for adjudication of disputes between them; and the object of the legislature would be frustrated if after every few months by unilateral action the employer or the employees may be entitled to reopen the dispute and ignore the obligations declared to be binding by the process of adjudication.
(emphasis added) There is a remarkable continuity in the Bombay High Court (a jurisdiction where industrial unrest is a sensitive issue) because we find that another Division Bench interpreting similar provisions in the Bombay Industrial Relations Act has been persuaded by the same reasoning, well brought out in the Head Note which we excerpt:(1) The result of the award ceasing to have effect on notice of termination being given under s. 116(1) of the Bombay Industrial Relations Act is that the award ceases to exist. The result of the award ceasing to have effect is that it is open to either party give a notice of change under s. 42 of the Act and attempt of bring about a change. Further it is open to the employer in cases in which he could bring a change without a notice of change such as matters enumerated in Sch. III to the Act to bring about a change, because the impediment placed in his way by s. 46(3) is removed. But until a change is brought about by the act either of employer or the employee after following relevant provisions in the Bombay Industrial Relations Act, 1946, the award that exists, shall continue to regulate the relations between the employer and the employees. The effect of termination of an award is not that the rights which flow from that award cease to be available to the employees, but the effect of termination is that the award continues to govern the relations between the employer and the employee until such time as a change is effected in accordance with the provisions of the Bombay Industrial Relations Act, 1946.
(emphasis added) Indeed, the precise submission that upon termination by notice, the award ceased to have effect for all purposes and the employees were not entitled to benefit thereunder was raised and examined as a matter of great importance to industrial relations. The court, in our view rightly rejected the contention of the employer and with forceful precision argued to reach the conclusion which the only sensible solution :(1) What this sub-section in effect provides is that if a notice of termination is given by either party to the award, then on the expiry of two months from the date of such notice the registered agreement, settlement or award shall cease to have effect....... But the question that we have been called upon to determine goes a little further than that and the question is by what is the relationship between the employers and the employees regulated after an award is terminated ? Does termination of the award create a vacuum and leave the employees to the tender mercy of the employer ? Does it, by providing that the award shall cease to have effect, get rid of the award so as to bring about the result that any agreement that governed the relations of the parties prior to the date of the award is thereby revived; or does it preserve such rights as the employees have, prior to the date of termination, already enjoyed under the award or does it preserve the whole of the award until it is changed by the procedure prescribed by the Bombay Industrial Relations Act for a change ? Now, quite obviously its would not be possible for any court to take the view that the termination of the award creates a vacuum in which the employees are at the tender mercy of the employer; nor does it appear to us to be possible to hold that by termination of the award the contract or agreement that governed the relations of the employer and the employees prior to the award is in some manner revived. Initially that contract or agreement had binding effect; but it ceased to have such effect on the award taking effect and the moment the award became binding on the parties, the antecedent contract or agreement was superseded by the award. It is not a case of an antecedent contract or agreement being suspended, because there is no provision for suspension which can even be spelt out from any of the sections of the Bombay Industrial Relations Act. The award, or as the case may be, a registered agreement or a settlement under the Bombay Industrial Relations Act has obviously the effect of superseding the contract or agreement that existed and that regulated the relations between the employer and the employees prior to the registered agreement, settlement or award taking effect under the provisions of the Act. Then we come to the next possibility: Is only so much of the award preserved as relates to the rights already enjoyed by the employees before the termination of the award ? We find it difficult so to hold. There is no principle or logic in dealing with an award in this piecemeal manner and preserving rights that have already been actually enjoyed and destroying those which, although they may have accrued, have to be enjoyed in future in terms of the award. Mr. Patel for the petitioners has argued that on the termination of the award the effect or rather the result that is brought about is that the rights of parties are frozen as of that date. Assuming such a concept of freezing the rights was adopted, even the freezing would be in respect of rights that have already accrued and it is not quite easy to conceive of rights which would not accrue to an employee under an industrial award and which can only be contingent. In any event, if the original contract or agreement has been superseded by the award, holding that the award is no longer what governs the relations between the employer and the employees would necessarily create a vacuum. Trying to save the creation of a vacuum by splitting up the award into two parts, the award under which benefits have already been enjoyed and that part of the award under which benefits have not been enjoyed, is dissecting the award in a manner not justified in law or logic. There appears to be on the scene after the termination of the award only one thing that can govern the relations between the employer and the employees and that undoubtedly can be nothing else than the award itself. The result of the award ceasing to have effect is not that the award ceases to exist; the result of the award ceasing to have effect is, as I have already pointed out, that it is open to either party to give a notice of change and to attempt to bring about a change.

(emphasis added) In the Madras jurisdiction the same view has prevailed as is apparent from 1961 I LLJ 105, 1971 I LLJ 310 and 1978 I LLJ 227. A Division Bench of that Court in Sathya Studios case(1) stressed the purpose of the ID Act and the preference for that interpretation which will advance that purpose. The Head Note brings out the holding correctly:

...... a combined reading of s. 18(3), sub-ss. (1) to (3) and (6) of s. 19, s. 23 and s. 29 leave no doubt that, bring about, conserve and promote industrial peace, the termination of an award under s. 19(6) does not mean that the terms and conditions evolved by it and applied to the industrial relations concerned would be set at large. All that that termination under s. 19(6) would mean is that, thereafter, the parties will be at liberty to raise a fresh industrial dispute if there is a basis therefor. But, so long as the award terminated under s. 19(6) has not been substituted by an award, the industry concerned has to proceed on the basis that the terms and conditions of the award would continue to govern the terms of employment.
(emphasis added) We need not labour the point further because we are bound, presidentially speaking, by three decisions of this Court. Chacko's case, (2) in a clinching passage, settles the proposition and the Indian Oil Corporation case(3) adopts a reasoning compelling the same conclusion even like Mohd. Quasim Larry(4) has done. Das Gupta, J. speaking for a Bench of three judges studies the statutory scheme bearing on the triple periods after an award came into being and indicated, by purposive interpretation of the relevant provisions, the legal stages of the life of an award. After quoting s. 19(6) of the ID Act, the Court observed(5):
This makes it clear that after the period of operation of an award has expired, the award does not cease to be effective. For, it continues to be binding thereafter on the parties until notice has been given by one of the parties of the intention to terminate it and two months have elapsed from the date of such notice.
The effect of s. 4 of the Industrial Disputes (Banking Companies) Decision Act is that the award ceased to be in force after March 31, 1959. That however has nothing to do with question as to the period for which it will remain binding on the parties thereafter. The provision in s. 19(6) as regards the period for which the award shall continue to be binding on the parties is not in any way affected by s. 4 of the Industrial Disputes (Banking Companies) Decision Act, 1955. Quite apart from this, however, it appears to us that even if an award has ceased to be in operation or in force and has ceased to be binding on the parties under the provisions of s. 19(6) it will continue to have its effect as a contract between the parties that has been made by industrial adjudication in place of the old contract. So long as the award remains in operation under s. 19(3), s. 23(c) stands in the way of any strike by the workmen and lock-out by the employer in respect of any matter covered by the award. Again, so long as the award is binding on a party, breach of any of its terms will make the party liable to penalty under s. 29 of the Act, to imprisonment which may extend to six months or with fine or with both. After the period of its operation and also the period for which the award is binding have elapsed s. 23 and s. 29 can have no operation. We can however see nothing in the scheme of Industrial Disputes Act to justify a conclusion that merely because these special provision as regards prohibition of strikes and lock-outs and of penalties for breach of award cease to be effective the new contract as embodied in the award should also cease to be effective. On the contrary, the very purpose for which industrial adjudication has been given the peculiar authority and right of making new contracts between employers and workmen makes it reasonable to think that even though the period of operation of the award and the period for which it remains binding on the parties may elapse-in respect of both of which special provisions have been made under ss. 23 and 29 respectively-the new contract would continue to govern the relations between the parties till it is displaced by another contract. The objection that no such benefit as claimed accrue to the respondent after March 31, 1959 must therefore be rejected.
(emphasis added) The power of reasoning, the purpose of industrial jurisprudence and the logic of the law presented with terse force in this pronouncement cannot be missed. The new contract which is created by an award continued to govern the relations between the parties "till it is displaced by another contract."
Another Bench of three judges, speaking through Chief Justice Gajendragadkar, in Md. Quasim Larrys case(1) has ratiocinated on similar lines:
When an award is made and it prescribes a new wage structure, in law the old contractual wage structure becomes inoperative and its place is taken by the wage structure prescribed by the award. In a sense, the latter wage structure must be deemed to be a contract between the parties because that, in substance, is the effect of industrial adjudication. The true legal position is that when industrial disputes are decided by industrial adjudication and awards are made, the said awards supplant contractual terms in respect of matters covered by them and are substituted for them.... In this connection, we may incidentally refer to the decision of this Court in the South Indian Bank Ltd. v. A. R. Chacko(2) where it has been observed by this Court that the very purpose for which industrial adjudication has been given the peculiar authority and right of making new contracts between employers and workmen makes it reasonable to think that even though the period of operation of the award and the period for which it remains binding on the parties may elapse-in respect of both of which special provisions have been made under sections 23 and 29 respectively-the new contract would continue to govern the relations between the parties till it is replaced by another contract. This observation clearly and emphatically brings out that the terms prescribed by an award, in law, and in substance, constitute a fresh contract between the parties.
(emphasis added) Again, a Bench of four Judges in the Indian Oil Corporation case(3) reiterated the same principle in the context of s. 9A of the ID Act although the court did not specifically advert to Chacko's case (supra). In the Indian Oil Corporation case (supra) the question turned on the management seeking to effect changes in the service conditions of the workmen. The Court made observations which have pertinence to the non-extinguishment of the contract of service until a negotiated or adjudicated substitution comes into being. Fazal Ali J. speaking for the bench observed:(1) In the circumstances, therefore, s. 9A of the Act was clearly applicable and the non-compliance with the provisions of this section would undoubtedly raise a serious dispute between the parties so as to give jurisdiction to the tribunal to give the award. If the appellant wanted to withdraw the Compensatory Allowance it should have given notice to the workmen, negotiated the matter with them and arrived at some settlement instead of withdrawing the compensatory allowance overnight.
(emphasis added) This ruling shows (a) that unilateral variation by the management is an exercise in futility, and (b) an award or settlement must take the place of the contract sought to be varied. We have a similar situation in the present case vis- a-vis the notice under s. 9A and the ruling in the Indian Oil case (supra) is a helpful guide.
A passing reference was made to a possible difference between an award and a settlement when it comes to termination of the terms. We have indicated already that a closer study of the scheme of the ID Act shows the distinction, if any, to be no more than between Tweedledum and Tweedledee. A Division Bench of the Bombay High Court had occasion to examine the effect of a notice under s. 19(2) of the ID Act in terminating a settlement and that ruling deserves special mention because it deals with the the survival beyond the two months notice of termination of a settlement (not an award). Tarkunde J, speaking for the Bench and following Chacko's case (supra) observed in the context of notice to terminate the settlement under s. 19(2) : (2) Even if a notice of its intention to terminate the settlement was given by either party, the settlement did not automatically cease to be operative on the expiry of two months from the date of the notice. The legal position is that the terms of a settlement continue to govern the relations between the parties after the notice of termination and the expiry of two months thereafter, until the settlement is replaced by a valid contract or award between the parties. This was laid down by the Supreme Court in South Indian Bank Ltd. v. Chacko [1964] 1 LLJ 19-AIR 1964 SC 1522, while dealing with the binding effect of an award under the provisions contained in sub-section (6) of section 19 of the Industrial Disputes Act. The Authority in the present case was, therefore, not justified in rejecting the workmen's application on the ground that the settlement on which the workmen relied had ceased to be operative.
(emphasis added) A precedent, as Disraeli said, embalms a principle. We have pointed out the principle and cited the precedents. There is more to it than mere wealth of precedents or what Burke called 'the deep slumber of a decided opinion'. It enlivens industrial peace, avoids labour discontent and helps to set the stage for next negotiations for better terms for workers. Economic freedom of the weaker sections is behind these precedents, almost reminding us of Tennyson:
A land of settled government, A land of just and old renown, Where freedom slowly broadens down, From precedent to precedent.
The law is lucid and the justice manifest on termination notice or notice of change the award or settlement does not perish but survives to bind until reincarnation, in any modified form, in a fresh regulation of conditions of service by a settlement or award. Precedents often broadly guide but when on the same point willy-nilly bind. So here, even if I would, I could not and even if I could, I would not depart from the wisdom in Chacko's case (supra) with consistent case-flow-before and after. An aching void, an abhorrent vacuum, a legicidal situation of industrial clash cannot be a judicial bonus when the constitutional command is social justice.
The catena of cases we have briefly catalogued discloses an unbroken stream of case-law binding on this court, the ratio whereof, even otherwise, commends itself to us. The award or settlement under the ID Act replaces the earlier contract of service and is given plenary effect as between the parties. It is not a case of the earlier contract being kept under suspended animation but suffering supersession. Once the earlier contract is extinguished and fresh conditions of service are created by the award or the settlement, the inevitable consequence is that even though the period of operation and the span of binding force expire, on the notice to terminate the contract being given, the said contract continues to govern the relations between the parties until a new agreement by way of settlement or statutory contract by the force of an award takes its place. If notice had not been given, the door for raising an industrial dispute and fresh conditions of service would not have been legally open. With action under s. 9A, s. 19(2) or (6), the door is ajar for disputes being raised and resolved. This, in short, is the legal effect not the lethal effect of invitation to industrial trial of strength with no contract of service or reversion to an obsolete and long ago 'dead' contract of service.
It is inconceivable that any other alternative subsists. For instance, imagine a case where for 30 years an award or settlement might have given various benefits to employees and at the end of 30 years a notice terminating the settlement were given by the employer. Does industrial law absurdly condemn the parties to a reversion to what prevailed between them 30 years ago? If the employees were given Rs. 100 as salary in 1947 and, thereafter, by awards and settlements the salary scale was raised to Rs. 1000 could it be the Management might, by unilateral yet disastrous action give notice under s. 19(2) or (6) terminating the settlement or award, tell the workers that they would be paid Rs. 100 which was the original contract although in law that contract had been extinguished totally by a later contract of settlement or by force of an award? The horrendous consequences of such an interpretation may best be left to imagination. Moreover, if industrial peace is the signature tune of industrial law, industrial violence would be the vicious shower of consequences if parties were relegated either to an ancient and obsolete contract or a state of lawless hiatus. No canon of interpretation of statutes can compel the court to construe a statutory provision in this manner. We have, no doubt, that the precedents on the point, the principles of industrial law, the constitutional sympathy of Part IV and the sound rules of statutory construction converge to the same point that when a notice intimating termination of an award or settlement is issued the legal import is merely that the stage is set for fresh negotiations or industrial adjudication and until either effort ripens into a fresh set of conditions of service the previous award or settlement does regulate the relations between the employer and the employees. The court never holds justice as hostage with law as janitor! Law, if at all, liberates justice through the judicial process. Fundamental error can be avoided only by remembering fundamental values.

At this stage I may record my firm conclusion that for the reasons already given the settlement under the ID Act does not suffer death merely because of the notice issued under s. 19(2). All that is done is a notice "intimating its intention to terminate the award". The award even if it ceases to be operative qua award, continues qua contract. Therefore, if the ID Act regulates the jural relations between the LIC and its employees-an 'if' we will presently scan-then the rights under the settlements of 1974 remain until replaced by a later award or settlement.

In my view, to reverse the High Court's holding will be to disregard the consistent current of case-law-a step I hesitate to take in the sensitive area of labour relations under a Constitution with social justice slant. Lord Herscheli in Russell v. Russell [1897] AC 395 observed:(1) I have no inclination towards a blind adherence to precedents. I am conscious that the law must be moulded by adapting it on established principles to the changing conditions which social development involves. The next logical question then is as to whether the ID Act is a general legislation pushed out of its province because of the LIC Act, a special legislation in relation to the Corporation employees. Immediately, we are confronted with the question as to whether the LIC Act is a special legislation or a general legislation because the legal maxim generalia specialibus non derogant is ordinarily attracted where there is a conflict between a special and a general statute and an argument of implied repeal is raised. Craise states the law correctly: (2) The general rule, that prior statutes are held to be repealed by implication by subsequent statutes if the two are repugnant, is said not to apply if the prior enactment is special and the subsequent enactment is general, the rule of law being, as stated by Lord Selbourne in Mary Seward v. Veera Cruz(3) "that where there are general words in a later Act capable of reasonable and sensible application without extending them to subjects specially dealt with by earlier legislation, you are not to hold that earlier and special legislation indirectly repealed, altered, or derogated from merely by force of such general words, without any indication of a particular intention to do so." "There is a well-known rule which has application to this case, which is that a subsequent general Act does not affect a prior special Act by implication. That this is the law cannot be doubted, and the cases on the subject will be found collected in the third edition of Maxwell is generalia specialibus non derogant-i.e. general provisions will not abrogate special provisions. "When the legislature has given its attention to a separate subject and made provision for it, the presumption is that a subsequent general enactment is not intended to interfere with the special provision unless it manifests that intention very clearly. Each enactment must be construed in that respect according to its own subject matter and its own terms.

The crucial question which demands an answer before we settle the issue is as to whether the LIC Act is a special statute and the ID Act a general statute so that the latter pro tanto repeals or prevails over the earlier one. What do we mean by a special statute and, in the scheme of the two enactments in question, which can we regard as the special Act and which the general ? An implied repeal is the last judicial refuge and unless driven to that conclusion, is rarely restored to. The decisive point is as to whether the ID Act can be displaced or dismissed as a general statute. If it can be and if the LIC Act is a special statute the proposition contended for by the appellant that the settlement depending for its sustenance on the ID Act cannot hold good against s. 11 and s. 49 of the LIC Act, read with Reg. 58 thereunder. This exercise constrains me to study the scheme of the two statutes in the context of the specific controversy I am dealing with.

There is no doubt that the LIC Act, as its long title suggests, is an Act to provide for the nationalisation of life insurance business in India by transferring all such business to a Corporation established for the purpose and to provide for the regulation and control of the business of the Corporation and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. Its primary purpose was to nationalise private insurance business and to establish the Life Insurance Corporation of India. Inevitably, the enactment spelt out the functions of the Corporation, provided for the transfer of existing life insurance business to the Corporation and set out in detail how the management, finance, accounts and audit of the Corporation should be conducted. Incidentally, there was provision for transfer of service of existing employees of the insurers to the Corporation and, sub-incidentally, their conditions of service also had to be provided for. The power to make regulations covering all matters of management was also vested in appropriate authorities. It is plain and beyond dispute that so far as nationalisation of insurance business is concerned, the LIC Act is a special legislation, but equally indubitably, is the inference, from a bare perusal of the subject, scheme and sections and understanding of the anatomy of the Act that it has nothing to do with the particular problem of disputes between employer and employees, or investigation and adjudication of such disputes. It does not deal with workmen and disputes between workmen and employers or with industrial disputes. The Corporation has an army of employees who are not workmen at all. For instance, the higher echelons and other types of employees do not fall within the scope of workmen as defined in s. 2(s) of the ID Act. Nor is the Corporation's main business investigation and adjudication of labour disputes any more than a motor manufacturer's chief business is spraying paints ! In determining whether a statute is a special or a general one, the focus must be on the principal subject matter plus the particular perspective. For certain purposes, an Act may be general and for certain other purposes it may be special and we cannot blur distinctions when dealing with finer points of law. In law, we have a cosmos of relativity, not absolutes-so too in life. The ID Act is a special statute devoted wholly to investigation and settlement of industrial disputes which provides definitionally for the nature of industrial disputes coming within its ambit. It creates an infrastructure for investigation into, solution of and adjudication upon industrial disputes. It also provides the necessary machinery for enforcement of awards and settlements. From alpha to omega the ID Act has one special mission-the resolution of industrial disputes through specialised agencies according to specialised procedures and with special reference to the weaker categories of employees coming within the definition of workmen. Therefore, with reference to industrial disputes between employers and workmen, the ID Act is a special statute, and the LIC Act does not speak at all with specific reference to workmen. On the other hand, its powers relate to the general aspects of nationalisation, or management when private businesses are nationalised and a plurality of problems which, incidentally, involve transfer of service of existing employees of insurers. The workmen qua workmen and industrial disputes between workmen and the employer as such, are beyond the orbit of and have no specific, or special place in the scheme of the LIC Act. And whenever there was a dispute between workmen and management the ID Act mechanism was resorted to.

What are we confronted with in the present case, so that I may determine as between the two enactments which is the special ? The only subject which has led to this litigation and which is the bone of contention between the parties is an industrial dispute between the Corporation and its workmen qua workmen. If we refuse to be obfuscated by legal abracadabra and see plainly what is so obvious, the conclusion that flows, in the wake of study I have made, is that vis a vis 'industrial disputes' at the termination of the settlement as between the workmen and the Corporation the ID Act is a special legislation and the LIC Act a general legislation. Likewise, when compensation on nationalisation is the question, the LIC Act is the special statute. An application of the generalia maxim as expounded by English text-books and decisions leaves us in no doubt that the ID Act being special law, prevails over the LIC Act which is but general law.

I am satisfied in this conclusion by citations but I content myself with a recent case where this Court tackling a closely allied question came to the identical conclusion.(1) The problem that arose there was as to whether the standing orders under the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 1946, prevailed as against Regulations regarding the age of superannuation made by the Electricity Board under the specific power vested by s. 79(c) of the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948 which was contended to be a special law as against the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act. This court (a bench of three judges) speaking through Chinnappa Reddy, J. observed:(2) The maxim "Generalia specialibus non derogant" is quite well known. The rule flowing from the maxim has been explained in Mary Seward v. The owner of the Veera Cruz (3) as follows:

"Now if anything be certain it is this, that where there are general words in a later Act capable of reasonable and sensible application without extending them to subjects specially dealt with by earlier legislation, you are not to hold that earlier and special legislation indirectly repealed, altered, or derogated from merely by force of such general words, without any indication of a particular intention to do so."
In J. K. Cotton Spinning & Weaving Mills Co. Ltd. v. State of Uttar Pradesh this Court observed (at page 1174) "The rule that general provisions should yield to specific provisions is not an arbitrary principle made by lawyers and judges but springs from the common understanding of men and women that when the same person gives two directions one covering large number of matters in general and another to only some of them his intention is that these latter directions should prevail as regards these while as regards all the rest the earlier direction should have effect". We have already shown that the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act is a special Act dealing with a specific subject, namely with conditions of service, enumerated in the Schedule, of workmen in industrial establishments. It is impossible to conceive that Parliament sought to abrogate the provisions of the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act embodying as they do hardwon and precious rights of workmen and prescribing as they do an elaborate procedure, including a quasi-judicial determination, by a general, incidental provision like sec. 79(c) of the Electricity (Supply) Act. It is obvious that Parliament did not have before it the Standing Orders Act when is passed the Electricity (Supply) Act and Parliament never meant that the Standing Orders Act should stand pro tanto of the view that the provisions of the Standing Orders Act repealed by Sec. 79(c) of the Electricity Supply Act. We are clearly of the view that the provisions of the Standing Orders Act applies. I respectfully agree and apply the reasoning and the conclusion to the near-identical situation before me and hold that the ID Act relates specially and specifically to industrial disputes between workmen and employers and the LIC Act, like the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948, is a general statute which is silent on workmen's disputes, even though it may be a special legislation regulating the take- over of private insurance business.

A plausible submission was made by the appellants, which was repelled by the High Court, that the LIC Act contained provisions regarding conditions of service of employees and they would be redundant if the ID Act was held to prevail. This is doubly fallacious. For one thing, the provisions of ss. 11 and 49 are the usual general provisions giving a statutory corporation (like a municipality or university) power to recruit and prescribe conditions of service of its total staff-not anything special regarding 'workmen'. This Court in Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage case (7 judges' bench) (1) and long ago in D. N. Banerji v. P. R. Mukherjee & Ors (5 judges' bench(2) has held that the ID Act applied to workmen employed by those bodies when disputes arose. The general provision would still apply to other echelons and even to workmen if no industrial dispute was raised. Secondly, no case of redundant words arose because the Corporation, like a University, employed not only workmen but others also and to regulate their conditions of service, power was needed. Again, in situations where no dispute arose, power in the employer to fix the terms of employment had to be vested. This is a common provision of a general sort, not a particularised provision to canalise an industrial dispute.

What is special or general is wholly a creature of the subject and context and may vary with situation, circumstances and angle of vision. Law is no abstraction but realises itself in the living setting of actualities. Which is a special provision and which general, depends on the specific problem, the topic for decision, not the broad rubric nor any rule of thumb. The peaceful coexistence of both legislations is best achieved, if that be feasible, by allowing to each its allotted field for play. Sense and sensibility, not mechanical rigidity gives the flexible solution. It is difficult for me to think that when the entire industrial field, even covering municipalities, universities, research councils and the like, is regulated in the critical area of industrial disputes by the ID Act, Parliament would have provided as oasis for the Corporation where labour demands can be unilaterally ignored. The general words in ss. 11 and 49 must be read contextually as not covering industrial disputes between the workmen and the Corporation. Lord Haldane had, for instance, in 1915 AC 885 (891) observed that (1):

"general words may in certain cases properly be interpreted as having a meaning or scope other than the literal or usual meaning. They may be so interpreted where the scheme appearing from the language of the Legislature, read in its entirety, points to consistency as requiring modification of what would be the meaning apart from any context, or apart from the general law."
To avoid absurdity and injustice by judicial servitude to interpretative literality is a function of the court and this leaves me no option but to hold that the ID Act holds where disputes erupt and the LIC Act guides where other matters are concerned. In the field of statutory interpretation there are no inflexible formulae or fool- proof mechanisms. The sense and sensibility, the setting and the scheme, the perspective and the purpose-these help the judge navigate towards the harbour of true intendment and meaning. The legal dynamics of social justice also guide the court in statutes of the type we are interpreting. These plural considerations led me to the conclusion that the ID Act is a special statute when industrial disputes, awards and settlements are the topic of controversy, as here. There may be other matters where the LIC Act vis a vis the other statutes will be a special law. I am not concerned with such hypothetical situations now.

I have set out, right at the outset, that my perspective must be benign in tune with Part IV of the Constitution. In the UP State Electricity Board case(1) this Court underscored the same approach:

Before examining the rival contentions, we remind ourselves that the Constitution has expressed a deep concern for the welfare of workers and has provided in Art. 42 that the State shall make provision for securing just and humane conditions of work and in Art. 43 that the State shall endeavour to secure, by suitable legislation or economic organisation or in any other way, to all workers, agricultural, industrial or otherwise, work, a living wage, conditions of work ensuring a decent standard of life and full enjoyment of leisure etc. These are among the 'Directive Principles of State Policy'. The mandate of Article 37 of the Constitution is that while the Directive Principles of State Policy shall not be enforceable by any Court, the principles are 'nevertheless fundamental in the governance of the country' and 'it shall be the duty of the State to apply these principles in making laws'. Addressed to Courts, what the injunction means is that while courts are not free to direct the making of legislation, courts are bound to evolve, affirm and adopt principles of interpretation which will further and not hinder the goals set out in the Director Principles of State Policy. This command of the Constitution must be ever present in the minds of judges when interpreting statutes which concern themselves directly or indirectly with matters set out in the Directive Principles of State Policy. Whatever be the powers of regulation of conditions of service, including payment or non-payment of bonus enjoyed by the employees of the Corporation under the LIC Act, subject to the directives of the Central Government, they stem from a general Act and cannot supplant, subvert or substitute the special legislation which specifically deals with industrial disputes between workmen and their employers. In this view, other questions, which have been argued at length and considered by my learned brother, do not demand my discussion. The High Court was right in its conclusion and I affirm its judgment. I, therefore, direct the Corporation to fulfill its obligations in terms of the 1974 settlements and start negotiations, like a model employer, for a fair settlement of the conditions of service between itself and its employees having realistic and equitable regard to the prevailing conditions of life, principles of industrial justice and the directives underlying Part IV of the Constitution.
Judicial review of administrative action and judicial interpretation of legislative provisions have serious limitations. Nevertheless, that power is a constitutional fundamental which must be exercised circumspectly but without being scared by statutory omnipotence or executive finality. The words of Prof. Wade come to one's mind:
The law is still developing, but the important thing is that the courts once again accept, as they had always done except in their period of amnesia, that part of their duty was to require public authorities to respect certain basic rules of fairness in exercising power over the citizen.
I dismiss the appeal with costs. This disposes of Transfer Case No. 1 of 1979 also in which the order has to be that a writ will issue to the Corporation compelling it to carry out the terms of the Settlements of 1974 and injuncting it from acting upon or giving effect to the impugned notices, circulars and the said amended Government Order the said amended Staff Regulations being Annexures F, H, J, K and L thereto.
PATHAK, J.-I have read with great respect the separate judgments of my brother Krishna Iyer and my brother Koshal but in view of the importance of the questions raised I propose to deliver a separate judgment.
The facts of the case have already been set out in the judgments prepared by my learned brothers. I need mention again a few only. Clause (8) of the two settlements of 24th January, 1974 and 6th February, 1974 made the following provisions respecting bonus:
"(i) No profit sharing bonus shall be paid. However, the Corporation may, subject to such directions as the Central Government may issue from time to time, grant any other kind of bonus to its class III and IV employees.
(ii) An annual cash bonus will be paid to all class III and class IV employees at the rate of 15% of the annual salary.... actually drawn by an employee in respect of the financial year to which the bonus relates.
(iii) Save as provided herein all other terms and conditions attached to the admissibility and payment of bonus shall be as laid down in the settlement on bonus dated the 26th June, 1972."
The settlements were operative from 1st April, 1973 to 31st March, 1977. On 3rd March, 1978 the Life Insurance Corporation (the "Corporation") issued a notice, purportedly under s. 19(2), Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, of its intention to terminate the settlements on the expiry of two months because of economic and other reasons. The notice, however, recited the reservation that the material provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act did not apply to the Corporation and that the notice was not necessary. Another notice, this time under s. 9A, Industrial Disputes Act and issued on the same date, stated that it was intended to effect a change in the conditions of service of the workmen with effect from 1st June, 1978. The change notified related to the existing provision for bonus. A new clause was proposed.

The Life Insurance Corporation (Alteration of Remuneration and other Terms and Conditions of Service of Employees) Order, 1957 (the "Standardisation Order") was amended under s. 11(2), Life Insurance Corporation Act (the "Corporation Act") on 26th May, 1978 with effect from 1st June, 1978 substituting a new clause (9) for the original clause in respect of bonus. On the same date, the Corporation acting under clauses (b) and (bb) of s. 49(2) of the same Act amended the Life Insurance Corporation (Staff) Regulations, also with effect from 1st June, 1978 and substituted for the existing provision a new Regulation 58 along the same lines. Clause (9) of the Standardisation Order and Regulation 58 of the (Staff Regulations) now read as follows:

"No employee of the Corporation shall be entitled to profit-sharing bonus. However, the Corporation may, having regard to the financial condition of the Corporation, in respect of any year and subject to the previous approval of the Central Government, grant non- profit-sharing bonus to its employees in respect of that year at such rates as the Corporation may think fit and on such terms and conditions as it may specify as regards the eligibility of such bonus."
The amendments made in the Standardisation Order and the Staff Regulations, in their application to the workmen of the Corporation, were made for the purpose of nullifying any further claim to annual cash bonus in terms of the settlements of 1974. The workmen challenged the validity of the amendments in so far as it affected their claim to the bonus, and the Allahabad High Court having found in their favour, the Corporation has appealed to this Court. An identical controversy is the subject-matter of a writ petition filed in the Calcutta High Court and transferred to his Court.

The first question is whether the new clause (9) of the Standardisation Order succeeds in defeating the claim of the workmen. To determine that, s. 11 of the Corporation Act must be examined. Sub-s. (1) guarantees to the transferred employee the same tenure, at the same remuneration and upon the same terms and conditions on the transfer to the Corporation as he enjoyed on the appointed day under the insurer, and he is entitled to then until they are duly altered by the Corporation or his employment in the Corporation is terminated. The sub-section envisages alteration by the Corporation.

Sub-s. (2) of s. 11, by its first limb, confers power or the Central Government to alter the scales of remuneration and other terms and conditions of service applicable to transferred employees. Predictably, when the transferred employees of different insurers were brought together in common employment under the Corporation they would have been enjoying different scales of remuneration and other terms and conditions of service. The power under this part of sub-s. (2) is intended for the purpose of securing uniformity among them. The second limb of sub-s. (2) is the source of controversy before us. It empowers the Central Government to reduce the remuneration payable or revise the other terms and conditions of service. That power is to be exercised when the Central Government is satisfied that the interests of the Corporation and its Policy holders require such reduction or revision. The question is whether the provision is confined to transferred employees only or extends to all employees generally. In my opinion, it is confined to transferred employees. The provision is a part of the scheme enacted in Chapter IV providing for the transfer of existing life insurance business from the insurers to the Corporation, and the attendant concomitants of that process. There is provision for the transfer of the assets and liabilities pertaining to the business, of provident funds, superannuation and other like funds, of the services of existing employees of insurers to the Corporation and also of the services of existing employees of chief agents of the insurers to the Corporation, and finally for the payment of compensation to the insurers for the transfer of the business to the Corporation. They are all provisions relating to the process of transfer. Sub-s. (2) of s. 11 is a part of that process, involving as it does the integration of the Corporation's staff and labour force. While the first limb of the sub-section provides for securing uniformity among the transferred employees in regard to the scales of remuneration and other terms and conditions of service, the second limb provides that if after such uniformity has been secured, or even in the process of securing such uniformity, the Central Government finds that the interests of the Corporation and its policy holders require a reduction in the remuneration payable or revision of the other terms and conditions of service applicable to those employees, it may make an order accordingly. It is true that the words "employees or any class of them" in the second limb are not prefaced by the qualifying word "transferred" or "such". But that was hardly necessary when regard is had to the mosaic of sections in which the provision is located. Admittedly, the first limb of sub-s. (2) relates to transferred employees only, and it must be held that so does the second limb. Both provisions are intended to constitute a composite process for rationalising the scales of remuneration and other terms and conditions of service of transferred employees with a view not only to effecting a standardisation between the transferred employees but also to revising their scales of remuneration, and terms and conditions of service to a pattern which will enable the newly established Corporation to become a viable and commercially successful enterprise. The standpoint of the second limit of the sub-section, as its language plainly indicates, is provided by the interests of the Corporation and its policy holders. For that reason, it is open to the Central Government under the sub-section to ignore the guarantee contained in sub-section (1) of s. 11 in favour of the employees, or anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, or any other law for the time being in force or any award, settlement or agreement for the time being in force. Benefits conferred thereunder on the employees must yield to the need for ensuring that the Corporation and its policy holders do not suffer unreasonably from the burden of such benefits. The need for such a provision arises because it is a burden by which the Corporation finds itself saddled upon the transfer a burden not of its own making. Unless the statute provided for such relief, the weight of that burden could conceivably cripple the successful working of the Corporation from its inception as a business organisation. It is situation to be distinguished from what happens when the Corporation, launched on its normal course, voluntarily assumes, in the course of its working, obligations in respect of its employees or becomes subject to such obligations by reason of subsequent industrial adjudication. Like any other employer, the Corporation is then open to the normal play of industrial relations in contemporary or future time. That the two provisions of sub- s. (2) are linked with the process of transfer and integration is further indicated by the circumstance that the power thereunder is vested in the Central Government. The scheme of the sections in Chapter IV indicates generally that Parliament has appointed the Central Government as the effective and direct instrumentality for bringing about the transfer and integration in the different sectors of that process.

There is no danger of an order made by the Central Government under the second limb of sub-s. (2) in respect of transferred employees being struck down on the ground that it violates the equality provisions of Part III of the Constitution because similar action has not been taken in respect of newly recruited employees. So long as such order is confined to what is necessitated by the process of transfer and integration, the transferred employees constitute a reasonably defined class in themselves and form no common basis with newly recruited employees.

I am unable to subscribe to the view that the second limb to sub-s. (2) of s. 11 is related to employees generally, that is to say, both transferred and newly recruited employees, of the Corporation.

Another point is whether the power under the second limb of sub-s. (2) of s. 11 can be exercised more than once. Clearly, the answer must be in the affirmative. To effectuate the transfer appropriately and completely it may be necessary to pass through different stages, and at each stage to make a definite order. So long as the complex of orders so made is necessarily linked with the process of transfer and integration, it is immaterial that a succession of orders is made. I am not impressed by the circumstance that the original Bill moved in Parliament for amending sub- s. (2) of s. 11 contained the words "from time to time" and that those words were subsequently deleted when enactment took place. The intent of the legislative provision must be discovered primarily from the legislation itself.

Now turning to the notification dated 26th May, 1978 which inserted the new clause (9) in the standardisation Order, it is evident from the recital with which it opens that it is intended to apply to transferred employees only. It declares explicitly that the Central Government is satisfied that a revision of the terms and conditions of service of the transferred employees is considered necessary. However, there is nothing to show that the amendment is related to the process of transfer and integration. On the contrary, the circumstance that an identical provision has been made by the Corporation, with the prior approval of the Central Government, in the new Regulation 58 by a notification issued under both clauses (b) and (bb) of the s. 49(2), that is to say, in respect of both newly recruited as well as transferred employees, demonstrates that the provision has no particular relationship with that process. Accordingly, I am of opinion that the notification dated 26th May, 1978 purporting to amend the Standardisation Order is invalid. It has no effect on the right to bonus claimed by the workmen.

That takes us to question whether the new Regulation 58 inserted in the (Staff) Regulations by the Life Insurance Corporation of India (Staff) Second Amendment Regulations, 1978 can be invoked against the workmen of the Corporation.

The workmen contend that the Industrial Disputes Act constitutes special legislation for the resolution of industrial disputes and inasmuch as it has been specially enacted for the promotion of harmonious relations between an employer and his workmen all matters concerning the workmen must be regarded as falling within the scope of the Industrial Disputes Act. The Corporation Act, it is said, has a different orientation. It is concerned primarily with the nationalisation of life insurance business; and the employment of a staff, and their terms and conditions of service as well as disputes concerning them, are subsidiary to the main purpose of nationalisation. The workmen, it is urged, are a special category of the total staff employed by the Corporation, and as regards them it is the Industrial Disputes Act and not the Corporation Act which governs. Accordingly, the argument goes, a settlement effected under s. 18 of the Industrial Disputes Act must continue to have force as determined by s. 19(2) of the Act and even thereafter, and nothing contained in the Corporation Act or the Regulations made thereunder can be permitted to affect the operation of its terms. It is urged that Regulation 58 cannot be applied in the case of those employees of the Corporation who are "workmen" within the meaning of the Industrial Disputes Act.

The case of the Corporation and the Union of India is that Regulation 58 was framed when the settlements had ceased to be operative and binding under s. 19(2), Industrial Disputes Act, that even if it be assumed that a contract existed between the parties at the time it must yield to Regulation 58, which had the force of law. It was contended that as regards the workmen of the Corporation, the Corporation Act, is a special law and the Industrial Disputes Act is the general law and, therefore, Regulation 58 must prevail over any transaction under the Industrial Disputes Act.

Before any thing more, it is necessary to ascertain the true relationship of the parties in respect of the settlements of 1974 at the time when Regulation 58 was framed. The settlements were to remain in operation for a period of four years ending 31st March, 1977. Admittedly, they were settlements reached under the Industrial Disputes Act. There is no dispute that they were settlements governed by s. 19, Industrial Disputes Act. Therefore, by virtue of s. 19(2) they were binding upto 31st March, 1977, the period agreed upon by the parties and they continued to be binding on the parties there after until the expiry of two months from the date on which written notice of the intention to terminate the settlement was given by one of the parties to the other.

It is desirable to appreciate what is a settlement as understood in the Industrial Disputes Act. In essence, it is a contract between the employer and the workmen prescribing new terms and conditions of service. These constitute a variation of existing terms and conditions. As soon as the settlement is concluded and becomes operative, the contract embodied in it takes effect and the existing terms and conditions of the workmen are modified accordingly. Unless there is some thing to the contrary in a particular term or condition of the settlement the embodied contract endures indefinitely, continuing to govern the relation between the parties in the future, subject of course to subsequent alteration through a fresh settlement, award or valid legislation. I have said that the transaction is a contract. But it is also something more. Conceptually, it is a "settlement". It concludes or "settles" a dispute. Differences which had arisen and were threatening industrial peace and harmony stand resolved in terms of a new contract. In order that the new contract be afforded a chance of being effectively worked out, a mandate obliging the parties to unreservedly comply with it for a period of time is desirable. It was made "binding" by the statute for such period. Section 19(2) was enacted. The spirit of conciliation, the foundation of the settlement, was required by law to bind the parties for the time prescribed. Immediate reagitation in respect of matters covered by the settlement was banned. Section 23 (c) prohibited strikes by the workmen in breach of the contract and lockouts by the employer in respect of such matters. A breach of any term was made punishable by s.

29. Certainty in industrial relations is essential to industry, and a period of such certainty is ensured by s. 19(2). On the expiry of the period prescribed in the sub- section, the conceptual quality of the transaction as a "settlement" comes to an end. The ban lifts. The parties are no longer bound to maintain the industrial status quo in respect of matters covered by the settlement. They are at liberty to seek an alteration of the contract. But until altered, the contract continues to govern the relations between the parties in respect of the terms and conditions of service.

The position seems comparable with what happens in the case of an award. Section 19(3) and s. 19(6) contain similar provisions. In the case of an award this Court has laid down in South Indian Bank Limited v. A. R. Chacko(1) that after the period of operation of an award has expired, the award does not cease to be effective. It continues to be binding on the parties, by virtue of s. 19(6), until notice has been given by one of the parties of the intention to terminate it and two months have elapsed from the date of such notice. Thereafter, "it will continue to have its effect as a contract between the parties that has been made by industrial adjudication in place of the old contract.... , the very purpose for which industrial adjudication has been given the peculiar authority and right of making new contracts between employers and workmen makes it reasonable to think that even though the period of operation of the award and the period for which it remains binding on the parties may elapse-in respect of both of which special provisions have been made under ss. 23 and 29 respectively- may expire, the new contract would continue to govern the relations between the parties till it is displaced by another contract." Later in Md. Qasim Larry, Factory Manager, Sasamusa Sugar Works v. Muhammad Samsuddin And Another,(2) the court held that when an award was made and it prescribed a new wage structure, in law the old contractual wage structure became inoperative and its place was taken by the wage structure prescribed by the award. The court said:

"In a sense, the latter wage structure must be deemed to be a contract between the parties, because that, in substance, is the effect of industrial adjudication. The true legal position is that when industrial disputes are decided by industrial adjudication and awards are made, the said awards supplant contractual terms in respect of matters covered by them and are substituted for them."
Learned counsel for the Corporation and the Union of India submit that the law declared by this Court in respect of an award does not hold true in the case of a settlement. I am unable to agree. Not only are the statutory provisions pertaining to a settlement and an award comparable in this regard but, if anything, the observations if read in respect of a settlement, which after all is a voluntary agreement between the parties, would seem to hold more strongly.

The contract between the parties embodied in the settlements of 1974 set forth the terms and conditions of service when Regulation 58 was substituted in the (Staff) Regulations under clauses (b) and (bb) of s. 49(2) of the Corporation Act. The question is whether Regulation 58 will prevail over the "settlement" contract. For that purpose, it is necessary to examine the controversy whether the Corporation Act is the general law and the Industrial Disputes Act the special law or vice-versa.

It will be noticed that the Corporation Act was enacted primarily for effecting the nationalisation of life insurance business by transferring all such business to a Corporation established for the purpose. The principal provision in the Corporation Act is s. 7, which provides for the transfer to, and vesting in, the Corporation of all the assets and liabilities appertaining to the controlled business of the insurers. The central purpose being assured, the concomitant provisions followed. These included making available to the insurers' employees, under s. 11(1), a continuous and unbroken tenure of employment on terms and conditions to which they would have been entitled on the "appointed day" as if the Corporation Act had not been passed. It was evidently intended that in running the business the Corporation should broadly take off where the insurers had ceased. For the purpose of enabling it to discharge its functions under the Act, the Corporation has been empowered by s. 23 to employ such number of persons as it thinks fit. The power conferred in clauses (b) and (bb) of s. 2(2) to make regulations prescribing the terms and conditions of service of newly recruited as well as transferred employees has been conferred for the same purpose, that is to say, the purpose, specifically mentioned in s. 49(1), of giving effect to the provisions of the Act. Clearly, the object behind s.11(1), s. 23 and clauses (b) and (bb) of s. 49(2) is to provide staff and labour for the purpose of the proper management of the nationalised life insurance business. On the other hand, the Industrial Disputers Act deals specifically with a special subject matter, the investigation and settlement of industrial disputes between an employer and his workmen. An "industrial dispute" as defined by s. 2(k) is a collective dispute. It is a special kind of dispute. Except for a case under s. 2A, the entire body of workmen or a substantial number of them constitutes a party to the dispute. And all the employees of an employer are not "workmen". Those employees are "workmen" who satisfy the definition contained in s. 2(s). A restricted category of employees is contemplated, and in an industrial dispute that category alone of all the employees can be interested. The resolution of industrial disputes under the Act is envisaged through the particular machinery and processes detailed therein. A special jurisdiction is created for the purpose. Industrial disputes, according to the Act, can be resolved by settlement or award. There are provisions setting forth the consequences of a settlement or an award, and there are also provisions indicating how a change can be initiated in the resulting industrial relations. Other chapters in the Industrial Disputes Act lay down the law in respect of strikes and lock-outs, lay off, retrenchment and closure and penalties for breach of its provisions. Plainly, if a settlement resolves an industrial dispute under the Industrial Disputes Act, it pertains to the central purpose of that Act. The Act constitutes special law in respect of a settlement reached under its auspices between an employer and his "workmen" employees. The consequences of such settlement are the product of the special law. The Corporation Act does not possess the features outlined above. It deals only generally in regard to a staff and labour force. They are referred to compendiously as "employees". No special provision exists in regard to industrial disputes and their resolution and the consequences of that resolution. The special jurisdiction created for the purpose under the Industrial Disputes Act is not the subject-matter of the Corporation Act at all. It would be correct to say that no corresponding provision in the Corporation Act, subsequent enactment, deals with the subject matter enacted in the industrial Disputes Act. Yet Parliament intended to provide for the Corporation's "workmen" employees the same opportunities as are available under the Industrial Disputes Act to the workmen of other employers. That is demonstrated by s. 2(a)(i) of that Act. The expression "appropriate Government" is specifically defined by it in relation to an industrial dispute concerning the Life Insurance Corporation. Both the Central Government and the Corporation understood the Industrial Disputes Act in that light, for one finds that Regulation 51(2) of the (Staff) Regulations made by the Corporation under clauses (b) and (bb) of s. 49(2) of the Corporation Act, with the previous approval of the Central Government, speaks of giving effect to a revision of scales of pay, dearness allowances or other allowances "in pursuance of any award, agreement or settlement".

In my opinion, it is difficult to resist the conclusion that the Industrial Disputes Act is a special law and must prevail over the Corporation Act, a general law, for the purpose of protecting the sanctity of transactions concluded under the former enactment. It is true that as laid down in Life Insurance Corporation of India v. Sunil Kumar Mukherjee(1) and reiterated in Sukhadev Singh v. Bhagat Ram,(2) the Regulations framed under the Corporation Act have the force of law. But that is of little moment if no reference is permissible to the Regulations when considering the validity and operation of the "settlement" contract. Accordingly, Regulation 58, a product of the Corporation Act, cannot supersede the contract respecting bonus between the parties resulting from the settlements of 1974. Support is derived for this conclusion from U. P. State Electricity Board & Ors. v. Hari Shanker Jain & Ors.(3) where reference has been made to Mary Sewards v. The Owner of the Vera Cruz(4) and J. K. Cotton Spinning & Weaving Mills Ltd. v. State of Uttar Pradesh(5).

At the same time, it is pertinent to note that the "workmen" employees of the Corporation continue to be governed in matters not covered by the settlements by the (Staff) Regulations, and that position is expressly recognised in clause 12(4) of the settlements of 1974. Clause 12(4) declares:

"Except as otherwise provided or modified by this settlement, the workmen shall continue to be governed by all the terms and conditions of service as set forth and regulated by the Life Insurance Corporation of India (Staff) Regulations, 1960..... as also the administrative instructions...."
Our attention has been drawn to s. 11(1), Corporation Act which empowers the Corporation to duly alter the terms and conditions of service of transferred employees. In construing the scope of the Corporation's powers in that behalf, it seems to me that appropriate importance should be attached to the qualifying word "duly". When the Corporation seeks to alter the terms and conditions of transferred employees, it must do so in accordance with law, and that requires it to pay proper regard to the sanctity of rights acquired by the "workmen" employees under settlements or awards made under the Industrial Disputes Act. The only provision, so far as I can see where the Corporation Act permits disregard of the Industrial Disputes Act and awards, settlements or agreements is the second limb of s. 11(2). And the scope of that provision, as I have explained, is confined to the peculiar circumstance in which the Corporation immediately on coming into existence, finds itself saddled with a recurring financial burden, by virtue of the service of the transferred employees, too heavy for its own viability as a business organisation. No such provision is to be found elsewhere in the Corporation Act. It is conspicuous by its absence in clauses (b) and (bb) of s. 49(2). The provision in s. 11(2) has been made for the purpose of protecting the interests of the Corporation and its policyholders. The policyholders constitute an important and significant sector of public interest. Indeed, the avowed object of the entire Corporation Act is to provide absolute security to the policyholders in the matter of their life insurance protection. That is assured by a wise management of the Corporation's business, and by ensuring that when settlements are negotiated between the Corporation and its workmen or when industrial adjudication is initiated in labour courts and industrial tribunals, the protection of the policyholders will find appropriately significant emphasis in the deliberations.

In the view that the notification dated 26th May, 1978 purporting to amend the Standardisation order by substituting clause (9) is invalid and the newly enacted Regulation 58 does not effect the contract in respect of bonus embodied in the settlements of 1974 between the Life Insurance Corporation and its "workmen" employees, effect must be given to that contract and this appeal must fail and the writ petition, transferred from the Calcutta High Court, must succeed. If the terms and conditions of service created by the contract need to be reconsidered, recourse must be had to the modes recongnised by law-negotiated settlement, industrial adjudication or appropriate legislation.

In the result, Civil Appeal No. 2275 of 1978 is dismissed with costs to the first, second and third respondents. The fourth respondent shall bear its own costs. The Transfer Petition No. 16 of 1979 is allowed in the terms set out above, costs to be paid to the petitioners by the second respondent.

KOSHAL, J.-By this judgment I shall dispose of Civil Appeal No. 2275 of 1978 which has been instituted by special leave granted by this Court against a judgment dated August 11, 1978 of a Division Bench of the Allahabad High Court allowing a petition under article 226 of the Constitution of India and issuing a writ of mandamus to the Life Insurance Corporation of India (hereinafter referred to as the Corporation) directing it not to give effect to a notice dated the 6th May, 1978, issued by it under section 9A of the Industrial Disputes Act (I. D. Act for short) as also to a notification dated the 26th May, 1978 issued under sub- section (2) of section 11 of the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956 (hereinafter called the L. I. C. Act). This judgment shall also cover Transfer Case No. 1 of 1979 in which another petition under article 226 aforesaid instituted before the High Court of Calcutta and raising the same questions which fall for decision in the said appeal is awaiting disposal by us as that petition was transferred to this Court by its order dated the 10th September, 1979.

2. The petition decided by the Allahabad High Court was filed by the Class III and Class IV employees of the Corporation challenging the right of the employer and the Union of India to change to the detriment of the said employees a condition of service regarding the payment to them of bonus to which they had earlier become entitled through a settlement with the Corporation made under section 18 of the I. D. Act.

3. The petition last mentioned arose in circumstances which may be set out in some detail. The Corporation came into existence on the 1st September, 1956, as a statutory authority established under the L. I. C. Act. As from the said date all institutions carrying on life insurance business in India were nationalised to the extent of such business and their corresponding assets and liabilities were transferred to the Corporation. Section 11 of the L. I. C. Act provided for the transfer of service of those employees of such institutions who were connected with life insurance business (described in the Act as "controlled business") immediately before the said date to the Corporation and for some other matteds. As it is the interpretation of that section which is mainly in controversy before us, it may be set out here in extenso:

"11.(1) Every whole-time employee of an insurer whose controlled business has been transferred to and vested in the Corporation and who was employed by the insurer wholly or mainly in connection with his controlled business immediately before the appointed day shall, on and from the appointed day, become an employee of the Corporation, and shall hold his office therein by the same tenure, at the same remuneration and upon the same terms and conditions and with the same rights and privileges as to pension and gratuity and other matters as he would have held the same on the appointed day if this Act had no: been passed, and shall continue to do so unless and until his employment in the Corporation is terminated or until his remuneration, terms and conditions are duly altered by the Corporation:
"Provided that nothing contained in this sub- section shall apply to any such employee who has, by notice in writing given to the Central Government prior to the appointed day, intimated his intention of not becoming an employee of the Corporation. "(2) Where the Central Government is satisfied that for the purpose of securing uniformity in the scales of remuneration and the other terms and conditions of service applicable to employees of insurers whose controlled business has been transferred to, and vested in, the Corporation, it is necessary so to do, or that, in the interests of the Corporation and its policy-holders, a reduction in the remuneration payable, or a revision of the other terms and conditions of service applicable, to employees or any class of them is called for, the Central Government may, notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), or in the Industrial Disputes Act 1947, or any other law for the time being in force, or in any award, settlement or agreement for the time being in force, alter (whether by way of reduction or otherwise) the remuneration and the other terms and conditions of service to such extent and in such manner as it thinks fit; and if the alteration is not acceptable to any employee, the Corporation may terminate his employment by giving him compensation equivalent to three months' remuneration unless the contract of service with such employee provides for a shorter notice of termination.
"Explanation.-The compensation payable to an employee under this sub-section shall be in addition to, and shall not affect, any pension, gratuity, provident fund money or any other benefit to which the employee may be entitled under his contract of service.
"(3) If any question arises as to whether any person was a whole-time employee of an insurance or as to whether any employee was employed wholly or mainly in connection with the controlled business of an insurer immediately before the appointed day the question shall be referred to the Central Government whose decision shall be final.
"(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, or in any other law for the time being in force, the transfer of the services of any employee of an insurer to the Corporation shall not entitle any such employee to any compensation under that Act or other law, and no such claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority."
Section 23 of the L. I. C. Act gave to the Corporation the power to employ such number of persons as it thought fit for the purpose of enabling it to discharge its functions under the Act and declared that every person so employed or whose services stood transferred to the Corporation under section 11 would be liable to serve anywhere in India. Section 49 conferred on the Corporation the power to make regulations for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of the Act with the previous approval of the Central Government. Sub section (2) of that section enumerated various matters in relation to which such power was particularly conferred. Clauses (b) and (bb) of sub- section (2) read thus:

"(b) the method of recruitment of employees and agents of the Corporation and the terms and conditions of service of such employees or agents;
"(bb) the terms and conditions of service of persons who have become employees of the Corporation under sub-section (1) of section 11;"
On the 1st June, 1957, the Central Government, in exercise of the powers conferred on it by sub-section (2) of section 11 of the L. I. C. Act, promulgated the Life Insurance Corporation (Alteration of Remuneration and other Terms and Conditions of Service of Employees) Order, 1957 (for short "the 1957 order") altering the remuneration and other terms and conditions of service of those employees of the Corporation whose services had been transferred to it under sub-section (1) of that section (referred to hereinafter as the transferred employees). Clause 9 of the 1957 order declared that no bonus would be paid but directed that the Corporation would set aside an amount every year for expenditure on schemes of general benefit scheme and on other amenities to them. On the 26th June 1959, the Central Government amended clause 9 of the 1957 order so as to provide that non-profit sharing bonus would be paid to those employees of the Corporation whose salary did not exceed Rs. 500/ per month.

On the 2nd July, 1959 there was a settlement between the Corporation and its employees providing for payment to them of cash bonus at the rate of 1/2/1 months' basic salary for the period from the 1st September, 1956 to the 31st December, 1961.

In the year 1960 were framed, under section 49 of L. I. C. Act, the Life Insurance Corporation of India (Staff) Regulations, 1960 (the 1960 regulations, for brevity), whereof regulation 58 ran thus:

"The Corporation may, subject to such directions as the Central Government may issue, grant non-profit sharing bonus to its employees and the payment thereof, including conditions of eligibility for the bonus, shall be regulated by instructions issued by the Chairman from time to time."
Orders were again passed on 14th April, 1962 and 3rd August, 1963, the effect of which was to remove the limit of Rs. 500/- on the basic salary as a condition of eligibility for payment of bonus.

The settlement dated the 2nd July, 1959 was followed by three others which were arrived at on the 29th January, 1963, the 20th June, 1970 and the 26th June, 1972, respectively and each one of which provided for payment of bonus at a particular rate.

Disputes between the Corporation and its workmen in regard to the latter's conditions of service persisted nevertheless, but were resolved by two settlements dated the 24th January, 1974 and the 6th February, 1974, arrived at in pursuance of the provisions of section 18 read with section 2(p) of the I. D. Act. The Corporation was a party to both the settlement, which were identical in terms. However, while four of the five Unions of workmen subscribed to the first settlement, the fifth Union was a signatory to the second. The settlements provided for revised scales of pay, the method of their fixation and dearness and other allowances as well as bonus. Clause 8 of each of the settlements was to the following effect:

"Bonus "(i) No profit sharing bonus shall be paid. However, the Corporation may, subject to such directions as the Central Government may issue from time to time, grant any other kind of bonus to its Class III & IV employees.
(ii) An annual cash bonus will be paid to all Class III and Class IV employees at the rate of 15% of the annual salary (i.e. basic pay inclusive of special pay, if any, and dearness allowance and additional dearness allowance) actually drawn by an employee in respect of the financial year to which the bonus relates.
(iii) Save as provided herein all other terms and conditions attached to the admissibility and payment of bonus shall be as laid down in the Settlement on bonus dated the 26th June 1972."
Clause 12 of each settlement provided:

"(1) This settlement shall be effective from 1st April, 1973. and shall be for a period of four years, i.e., from 1st April, 1973 to 31st March, 1977. (2) The terms of the settlement shall be subject to the approval of the Board of the Corporation and the Central Government.
(3) This Settlement disposes of all the demands raised by the workmen for revision of terms and conditions of their service.
(4) Except as otherwise provided or modified by this Settlement, the workmen shall continue to be governed by all the terms and conditions of service as set forth and regulated by the Life Insurance Corporation of India (Staff Regulations), 1960 as also the administrative instructions issued from time to time and they shall, subject to the provisions thereof including any period of operation specified therein, be entitled to the benefits thereunder."
It is not disputed that the settlements were approved by the Board of the Corporation as also by the Central Government.

Under clause 11 of each settlement every employee of the Corporation had the option to elect to be governed either by the new scale of pay applicable to him or the scale which he had been enjoying hitherto. It is common ground between the parties that all the employees of the Corporation opted for the new scales of pay and that bonus was paid in accordance therewith for the years 1973-74 and 1974-75 in April 1974 and April 1975 respectively.

On 25th September 1975, the Payment of Bonus (Amendment) Ordinance, 1975 was promulgated by the President of India and was subsequently replaced by the Payment of Bonus (Amendment) Act, 1976 which was brought into force with effect from the date last mentioned. This amending law considerably curtailed the rights of employees of industrial undertakings to bonus, but was inapplicable to the Corporation by virtue of the provisions of section 32 of the Payment of Bonus Act. However, the payment of bonus for the year 1975-76 to the employees of the Corporation was stopped under instructions from the Central Government, whose action in that behalf was challenged by the employees through a petition under article 226 of the Constitution of India in the High Court of Calcutta, a single Judge of which issued a writ of mandamus directing the Corporation to act in accordance with the terms of the settlement dated the 24th January, 1974. The Corporation preferred a Letters Patent appeal against the decision of the learned single Judge and that appeal was pending disposal when the Central legislature promulgated the Life Insurance Corporation (Modification of Settlement) Act, 1976 (for short, the 1976 Act) section 3 of which laid down:

"Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, the provisions of each of the settlements, in so far as they relate to the payment of an annual cash bonus to every Class III and Class IV employee of the Corporation at the rate of fifteen per cent of his annual salary, shall not have any force or effect and shall not be deemed to have any force or effect on and from 1st day of April, 1975."
The 1976 Act was enacted on 29th May, 1976 and was challenged by the workmen in this Court which, on the 21st of February, 1978, declared it to be void as offending article 31(2) of the Constitution of India through a judgment which is reported as Madan Mohan Pathak v. Union of India , [1978] 3 S. C. R. 334, and directed the Corporation to forbear from implementing the 1976 Act and to pay to its Class III and Class IV employees bonus for the years 1-4- 1975 to 31-3-1976 and 1-4-1976 to 31-3-1977 in accordance with the terms of sub-clause (ii) of clause 8 of each settlement.

On the 3rd March, 1978, the Corporation issued to its workmen a notice under sub-section (2) of section 19 of the I. D. Act declaring its intention to terminate the settlements on the expiry of a period of two months from the date the notice was served. The notice, however, mentioned in express terms that according to the Corporation no such notice was really necessary for termination of the settlements. On the same date, another notice was issued by the Corporation under section 9A of the I. D. Act stating that it intended to effect a change in accordance with the contents of the annexure to the notice, as from the 1st June, 1978, in the conditions of service of its workmen. The said annexure contained the following clause:

"AND WHEREAS for economic and other reasons it would not be possible for the Life Insurance Corporation of India to continue to pay bonus on the aforesaid basis; "NOW, therefore, it is our intention to pay bonus to the employees of the Corporation in terms reproduced hereunder;
"No employee of the Corporation shall be entitled to profit sharing bonus. However, the Corporation may, having regard to the financial condition of the Corporation in respect of any year and subject to the previous approval of the Central Government, grant non-profit sharing bonus to its employees in respect of that year at such rate as the Corporation may think fit and on such terms and conditions as it may specify as regards the eligibility of such bonus'."
The workmen sent a reply to the two notices just above mentioned and took the stand that the Corporation had no right to render inoperative the clause regarding bonus contained in the two settlements.

On 26th May, 1978, the Corporation issued a notification under section 49 of the L. I. C. Act substituting a new regulation for the then existing regulation bearing serial number 58. The new regulation was to come into force from the 1st June, 1978, and stated:

"58. No employee of the Corporation shall be entitled to profit sharing bonus. However, the Corporation may, having regard to the financial condition of the Corporation in respect of any year and subject to the previous approval of the Central Government grant non-profit sharing bonus to its employees in respect of that year at such rate as the Corporation may think fit and on such terms and conditions as it may specify as regards the eligibility for such bonus."
Simultaneously an amendment on the same lines was made in the 1957 order (which, as already stated, was restricted in its application to transferred employees only) by the substitution of a new clause for the then existing clause 9 in pursuance of the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 11 of the L. I. C. Act. The new clause is in the following terms:

"9. No employee of the Corporation shall be entitled to profit sharing bonus. However, the Corporation may, having regard to the financial condition of the Corporation in respect of any year and subject to the previous approval of the Central Government, grant non-profit sharing bonus to its employees in respect of that year at such rate as the Corporation may think fit and on such terms and conditions as it may specify as regards the eligibility for such bonus."
It was the issuance of the two notices by the Corporation on the 3rd March, 1978, under section 19(2) and 9A of the I. D. Act respectively and the action taken by the Central Government on the 26th May, 1978, by making new provisions in regard to the payment of bonus to the Corporation's employees that furnished the cause of action for the latter to petition to the Allahabad High Court under article 226 of the Constitution of India.

4. After consideration of the various contentions raised before it the Allahabad High Court arrived at the following conclusions:

I. The I. D. Act is an 'independent Act' which deals with adjudication and settlement of matters in dispute between an employer and his workmen. It is thus a special law which would override the provisions of a general law like the L. I. C. Act.
II. Three corollaries follow from conclusion 1:
(a) Section 23 of the L. I. C. Act which envisages employment of persons by the Corporation implies settlement of conditions of service which may legally be superseded (only) by another settlement arrived at under section 18 of the I. D. Act.
(b) The new regulation 58 framed under section 49 of the L. I. C. Act and the notification issued under subsection (2) of section 11 thereof substituting a new clause 9 in the 1957 Order are wholly ineffective against the operation of the 1974 settlements which were arrived at in pursuance of the provisions of the I. D. Act and which therefore, continue to govern the parties thereto.
(c) After the issuance of the notices under sections 19(2) and 9A of the I.D. Act, the Corporation had no power to alter the condition of service of its employees in regard to bonus by a unilateral act as neither of the two sections confers such power on an employer.
III. Corollary (b) in conclusion II is in full accord with the view expressed in Madan Mohan Pathak's case (supra) by the Supreme Court in as much as it upheld the two settlements even though it did not advert to regulation 58 and further ruled that the conditions of service laid down in those settlements could be varied only by a fresh settlement or award made under the provisions of the I. D. Act and that till then sub-clause (ii) of clause 8 of each settlement (which is independent of clause (i) thereof) would remain in full force. None of the authorities reported as C. Sankararskavanon v. The State of Kerala Roshan Lal v. Union, Sukhdev v. Bhagatram,(3) Kalvammal Bhandari v. State of Rajasthan,(4) State of U.P. v. Babu Ram Upadhya,(5) I.T.O. v. M. C. Ponnoose(6) and cited on behalf of the Corporation lays down any rule to the contrary.

IV. In spite of clause 12 of the two settlements they did not cease to be binding on the parties thereto even after the expiry of the period of 4 years mentioned in that clause and the notice under section 19(2) of the I. D. Act issued by the Corporation would not terminate the settlements but would have the effect merely of paving the way for fresh negotiations. This proposition follows from South Indian Bank Ltd. v. A. R. Chacko,(7) and Indian Link Chain Ltd. v. Workmen,(8) and is not negatived by the decision in Premier Auto v. K. S. Wadke(9). Although Chacko's case dealt in terms with an award and not a settlement, no distinction exists between the two and they stand on the same footing for the purpose of judging the effect of a notice under section 19(2) of the I. D. Act.

V. There is no dispute that no petition under article 226 of the Constitution of India would lie merely for the enforcement of a contract or for the recovery of an amount payable by the Corporation to its employees where the latter had an alternative remedy under section 10 or 33-C of the I. D. Act. However, the relief sought by the workmen in the present case is directed only against the action taken by the Corporation and the Union of India under sections 19 and 9A of the I. D. Act and sections 11(2) and 49 of the L. I. C. Act-a relief similar to that granted by this Court in Madan Mohan Pathak's case (supra). The contention raised on behalf of the Corpo-

ration about the non-maintainability of the petition is therefore without force.

It was on the basic of these conclusions that the writ of mandamus mentioned in the opening paragraph of this judgment was issued by the High Court to the Corporation on whose behalf the first four of those conclusions have been impugned before us and I proceed to examine the same in the light of arguments advanced at length by learned counsel for the parties and for the Class II employees of the Corporation who were permitted to intervene in the appeal before us.

5. As conclusion II consists merely of corollaries derived directly from conclusion I and it is the correctness or otherwise of the latter that would determine the sustainability of the former, the two may legitimately be dealt with together, although it is conclusion I on which I would primarily concentrate.

6. For convenience of examination, conclusion I may be split up into two propositions:

(a) The I. D. Act is a special law because it deals with adjudication and settlement of matters in dispute between an employer and his workmen while the L. I. C. Act is a general law.
(b) The I. D. Act, being a special law, would override a general law like the L. I. C. Act.
7. Now in relation to proposition (a) it cannot be gain-said that the I. D. Act deals with the adjudication or settlement of disputes between an employer and his workmen and would, therefore, be a special law vis-a-vis another statute which covers a larger field and may thus be considered "general" as compared to it. It cannot, however, be regarded as a special law in relation to all other laws irrespective of the subject-matter dealt with by them. In fact a law may be special when considered in relation to another piece of legislation but only a general one vis-a- vis still another. An example will help illustrate the point. A law governing matters pertaining to medical education would be a special law in relation to a statute embracing education of all kinds but must be regarded as a general law when preference over it is claimed for what I may call a more special law, such as an Act dealing with only one aspect of medical education, say, instruction in the field of surgery. And even this "more special' law may become general if there is a conflict between it and another operating in a still narrower field, e.g., thoracic surgery.

"Special" and "general" used in this context are relative terms and it is the content one statute as compared to the other that will determine which of the two is to be regarded as special in relation to the other. Viewed in this light proposition (a) cannot stand scrutiny. The I. D. Act would no doubt be a special Act in relation to a law which makes provision for matters wider than but inclusive of those covered by it, such as the Indian Contract Act as that is a law relating to contracts generally (including those between an industrial employer and his workmen), but it would lose that categorisation and must be regarded as a general law when its rival is shown to operate in a field narrower than its own. And such a rival is that part of the L. I. C. Act which deals with conditions of service of the employees of the L.I.C.-a single industrial undertaking (of a special type) as opposed to all others of its kind which fall within the ambit of the I.D. Act. Where the competition is between these two Acts, therefore, the L. I. C. Act must be regarded as a special law and (in comparison thereto) the I. D. Act as a general law.
8. Proposition (b) is equally insupportable even if the I. D. Act is regarded as a special law in comparison to the L. I. C. Act. The High Court appears to have somehow tried to apply the maximum generalia specialibus non derogant to the situation with which it was concerned. But does that maxim lead to the proposition under discussion?

The general rule to be followed in the case of a conflict between two statutes is that the later abrogates the earlier one (Leges posteriores priores contrarias abrogant). To this general rule there is a well known exception, namely, generalia specialibus non derogant (general things do not derogate from special things), the implications of which are thus stated succinctly by Warl Jowitt in 'The Dictionary of English Law':

"Thus a specific enactment is not affected by a subsequent general enactment unless the earlier enactment is inconsistent with the later enactment, or unless there is some express reference in the later enactment to the earlier enactment, in either of which cases the maxim leges posteriores priores contrarias abrogant applies."
In other words a prior special law would yield to a later general law, if either of the following two conditions is satisfied:

(i) The two are inconsistent with each other.
(ii) There is some express reference in the later to the earlier enactment.
If either of these conditions is fulfilled the later law, even though general, will prevail.

The principles enunciated in Chapter 9 of 'Maxwell on the Interpretation of Statutes' are to the same effect:

"A later statute may repeal an earlier one either expressly or by implication. But repeal by implication is not favoured by the courts..........If, therefore, earlier and later statutes can reasonably be construed in such a way that both can be given effect to, this must be done.............. If, however, the provisions of a later enactment are so inconsistent with or repugnant to the provisions of an earlier one that the two cannot stand together, the earlier is abrogated by the later.............. Wherever Parliament in an earlier statute has directed its attention to an individual case and has made provision for it unambiguously, there arises a presumption that if in a subsequent statute the Legislature lays down a general principle, that general principle is not to be taken as meant to rip up what the Legislature had before provided for individually, unless an intention to do so, is specially declared." (emphasis supplied) The same principles have been thus reiterated in Chapter 15 of Craies on Statute Law:
"Parliament, in the exercise of its supreme legislative capacity, can extend, modify, vary, or repeal Acts passed in the same or previous sessions................ The provisions of an earlier Act may be revoked or abrogated in particular cases by a subsequent Act, either from the express language used being addressed to the particular point, or from implication or inference from the language used................. Where two Acts are inconsistent or repugnant, the latter will be read as having implieose. To the extent, therefore, that section 11(1) read with that clause confers on the Corporation the power to alter the terms and conditions in question-a power not enjoyed by it under the provisions of the I. D. Act-it is inconsistent with the I. D. Act and being a later law, would override that Act despite the absence of the non- obstante clause, the inconsistency having arisen from express language and not from mere implication.
But the matter does not end here as sub-sections (2) and (4) of section 11 and clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 49 of the L. I. C. Act pose other insurmountable hurdles in the way of the acceptance of proposition (b). The scope of sub-section (2) of section 11 was stated in Life Insurance Corporation of India v. Sunil Kumar Mukherjee & Ors (supra) by Gajendragadkar, J., in the following terms:
"Section 11(2) as it originally stood was substantially modified in 1957, and the plain effect of the provisions contained in the said sub-section as modified is that the Central Government is given the power to alter (whether by way of reduction or otherwise) the remuneration and the other terms and conditions of service to such extent and in such manner as it thinks fit. It is significant that this power can be exercised by the Central Government notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, or in any other law, or in any award, settlement or agreement for the time being in force. It was thought a that for a proper functioning of the Corporation it was essential to confer upon the Central Government an overriding power to change the terms and conditions of employees who were wholly or mainly employed by the insurers prior to the appointed day. Having conferred such wide power on the Central Government, section 11(2) further provides that if the alternation made by the Central Government in the terms and conditions of his service is not acceptable to any employee, the Corporation may terminate his employment by giving him compensation equivalent to three months' remuneration unless the contract of service with such employee provides for a shorter notice of termination. It is thus clear that in regard to cases fall under section 11(2), if as a result of the alteration made by the Central Government any employee does not want to work with the Corporation, he is given the option to leave its employment on payment of compensation provided by the last part of section 11(2). Thus, the scheme of the two sub-sections of section 11 is clear. The employees of the insurers whose controlled business has been taken over, become the employees of the Corporation, then their terms and conditions of service continue until they are altered by the Central Government, and if the alteration made by the Central Government is not acceptable to them, they are entitled to leave the employment of the Corporation on payment of compensation as provided by section 11(2)." (emphasis supplied) In other words sub-section (2) of section 11 not only given to the Central Government the power to alter the terms and conditions of service of the employees of the Corporation in certain situations, and to alter them even to the detriment of such employees, to such extent and in such manner as it thinks fit, but also states in so many words that such power shall be exercisable-
"Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 or in any other law for the time being in force, or in any award, settlement or agreement for the time being in force."
The mandate of the legislature has been expressed in clear and unambiguous terms in this non-obstante clause and is to the effect that the power of the Central Government to alter conditions of service of the employees of the Corporation shall be wholly unfettered and that any provisions to the contrary contained in the I. D. Act or for that matter, in any other law for the time being in force, or in any award, settlement, or agreement for the time being in force, would not stand in the way of the exercise of that power even if such exercise is to the detriment of the employees of the Corporation. The conferment of the power in thus in express supersession of the I. D. Act and of any settlement made thereunder. The provisions of that Act and the two settlements of 1974 must, therefore, yield to the dictates of section 11(2) and to the exercise of the power conferred thereby on the Central Government.

Sub-section (4) of section 11 is again illuminating as in the matter of compensation to be paid to a transferred employee it provides specifically that the provisions of sub-section (2) of that section shall override those of the I. D. Act and of any other law for the time being in force and that no claim to the contrary shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority. In the face of an express provision like this it is not open to the employees to contend that the law laid down in the I. D. Act and not sub-section (2) of section 11 would govern them.

The rule-making power conferred on the Corporation by section 49 of the L. I. C. Act must also be held to be exercisable notwithstanding the provisions of the I. D. Act. In clause (b) of sub-section (2) thereof the method of recruitment of employees and agents of the Corporation and the terms and conditions of their service are stated to be matters which the Corporation may deal with through regulations subject, however, to the previous approval of the Central Government. This power is expressly conferred on the Corporation in addition to that with which it is invested under clause (bb) of the same sub-section. If these two clauses were not meant to override the provisions of the I. D. Act on the same subject they would be completely meaningless, and that is a situation, as already pointed out, running directly counter to one of the accepted principles of interpretation of statutes. Besides, these two clauses are not to be read in isolation from section 11. The subject matter of the clauses and the section is overlapping and together they form an integrated whole. The clauses must, therefore, be read in the light of section 11. Sub-section (1) of that section confers power on the Corporation to alter the terms and conditions of service of the transferred employees and by necessary implication gives a go-bye to the I. D. Act which is again expressly superseded by sub-section (2) of that section in so far as the Central Government has been invested with the power in certain ciKB Microsoft Applicationsˆ 
 A *á
 B [ B \
 C "á C €
 D Y D Z
 E À€ F (€
 G +€ G €
 I € I €
 J Ç€ J Æ€
 K €
 L € L Å€
 M ,€ M F€
 N  á
 O á O X
 P  á P  á
 R R R P
 S á S €
 T € T €
 U € U €
 V %á V € ] C€
 ] /€  Ê
  Ê€  +á
  S€ .  á
 . È€ . !á  . #á . { ( l
 (  ( i  ( x (  # d
 # b # }  # r # p p Fá
 p €  p Eá
 y Å  y C€ z <€
 z ¶€  z µ€ { á q ®€
 q ­€  q ¯€ q °€ r Q€ s ¹€
 t -€ u Pá  u Qá v ³
 v S
 w *€ x T€
 x P€  x O€ $ c
 $ a $ |  $ q $ o - 
 - "á  - %á % m
 % [  % y % \ " f
 " h  " v " u ! e
 ! g  ! s ! t
   Â€   Á€   ²€ ' n
 ' _  ' z ' `
   :€   ;€ & k
 & ~ & j  & w & €
 W _ W `
 X #á X €
 Y ,á Y Ž
 Z +á Z  t  € A €  r €
 F &€ r '€  s '€
 H )€ w ‡  ˆ w 4€ñK €ñ0 »
ñr è Ì ÊZ¥             
                                                                              ÿÿÿÿ                                                Q     ÿÿÿÿ        ÿÿÿÿ        ÿÿÿÿ        ÿÿÿÿZ¥                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |08/15/1947|08/15/1947| ITA |124 |1999|07/14/1999|06/08/1999|08/15/1947| ITXA |124 |1999|01/26/2000|01/10/2000|08/15/1947| ITXA |124 |1999|08/15/1947|12/09/2001|08/15/1947| NMS |124 |1999|07/19/2001|07/13/2001|08/15/1947| NMS |124 |1999|08/02/2001|08/03/2001|08/15/1947| NMW |124 |1999|04/16/1999|08/15/1947|08/15/1947| SJ |124 |1999|04/02/2000|08/15/1947|08/15/1947| ARBP |124 |2000|04/24/2000|04/04/2000|08/15/1947| ARBP |124 |2000|08/22/2000|08/16/2000|08/15/1947| ARBPL|124 |2000|03/27/2000|08/15/1947|08/15/1947| CA |124 |2000|06/30/2000|08/15/1947|08/15/1947| CA |124 |2000|08/15/1947|06/30/2000|08/15/1947| CHOCL|124 |2000|02/15/2000|08/15/1947|08/15/1947| CHOCL|124 |2000|02/21/2000|02/15/2000|08/15/1947| CHOL |124 |2000|03/06/2000|08/15/1947|08/15/1947| CHOL |124 |2000|03/10/2000|03/06/2000|08/15/1947| CHOL |124 |2000|03/27/2000|03/10/2000|08/15/1947| CHOL |124 |2000|04/17/2000|04/10/2000|08/15/1947| CHS |124 |2000|12/08/2000|08/15/1947|08/15/1947| CHS |124 |2000|08/15/1947|12/08/2000|08/15/1947| CHSW |124 |2000|12/08/2000|08/15/1947|08/15/1947| CHSW |124 |2000|08/15/1947|12/08/2000|08/15/1947| CONP |124 |2000|10/03/2000|08/15/1947|08/15/1947| CONP |124 |2000|11/22/2000|11/06/2000|08/15/1947| CP |124 |2000|02/14/2000|08/15/1947|08/15/1947| CP |124 |2000|07/12/2000|06/09/2000|08/15/1947| IGP |124 |2000|11/22/2000|08/15/1947|08/15/1947| NMW |124 |2000|08/07/2000|08/01/2000|08/15/1947| APP |124 |2001|03/27/2001|03/06/2001|08/15/1947| APP |124 |2001|08/23/2001|08/09/2001|08/15/1947| APP |124 |2001|08/27/2001|08/23/2001|08/15/1947| ARBAP|124 |2001|09/21/2001|08/15/1947|08/15/1947| ARBP |124 |2001|03/19/2001|08/15/1947|08/15/1947| CHSW |124 |2001|01/28/2002|08/15/1947|08/15/1947| CHSW |124 |2001|08/15/1947|01/28/2002|08/15/1947| CP |124 |2001|01/31/2001|08/15/1947|08/15/1947| CP |124 |2001|06/29/2001|06/28/2001|08/15/1947| CP |124 |2001|08/15/1947|07/06/2001|08/15/1947| CP |124 |2001|07/25/2001|07/18/2001|08/15/1947| EXAL |124 |2001|06/24/2001|08/15/1947|08/15/1947| ITAL |124 |2001|08/14/2001|08/15/1947|08/15/1947| WP |124 |2001|01/24/2001|01/15/2001|08/15/1947| WP |124 |2001|01/29/2001|01/24/2001|08/15/1947| APP |124 |2002|03/20/2002|03/18/2002|08/15/1947| CA |124 |2002|03/01/2002|08/15/1947|08/15/1947| CP |124 |2002|03/14/2002|02/01/2002|08/15/1947| NMS |124 |2002|02/06/2002|08/15/1947|08/15/1947| WP |124 |2002|02/04/2002|08/15/1947|08/15/1947| S |1242 |1980|11/08/1997|12/09/1996|08/15/1947| S |1242 |1980|08/15/1947|08/18/1999|08/15/1947| S |1242 |1988|12/01/1996|02/26/1996|08/15/1947| CHS |1242 |1990|09/25/1997|06/29/1997|08/15/1947| NMS |1242 |1993|08/17/1996|08/11/1996|08/15/1947| S |1242 |1993|04/28/1999|08/15/1947|08/15/1947| CHS |1242 |1994|08/30/1996|08/15/1947|08/15/1947| S |1242 |1994|02/10/1999|02/03/1999|08/15/1947| APP |1242 |1996|12/23/1996|11/26/1996|08/15/1947| CHS |1242 |1996|09/19/1997|09/12/1997|08/15/1947| NMS |1242 |1996|01/26/1999|11/11/1998|08/15/1947| WP |1242 |1996|07/08/1996|08/15/1947|08/15/1947| APP |1242 |1998|01/11/1999|12/08/1998|08/15/1947| APPL |1242 |1998|02/16/1999|08/15/1947|08/15/1947| CHOL |1242 |1999|11/18/1999|08/15/1947|08/15/1947| CHS |1242 |1999|04/20/2000|04/06/2000|08/15/1947| CHS |1242 |1999|02/07/2001|01/11/2001|08/15/1947| CP |1242 |1999|12/06/1999|08/15/1947|08/15/1947| CP |1242 |1999|06/28/2000|02/01/2000|08/15/1947| SJ |1242 |1999|08/15/1947|01/08/2002|08/15/1947| WP |1242 |1999|05/04/1999|08/15/1947|08/15/1947| WP |1242 |1999|08/15/1947|06/11/1999|08/15/1947| WPL |1242 |1999|05/06/1999|05/05/1999|08/15/1947| CHS |1242 |2000|10/16/2009|08/15/1947|08/15/1947| CHS |1242 |2000|10/16/2000|10/16/2009|08/15/1947| CHS |1242 |2000|11/09/2000|10/16/2000|08/15/1947| CHS |1242 |2000|03/08/2001|05/01/2001|08/15/1947| APP |1242 |2001|03/26/2002|03/18/2002|08/15/1947| WP |1242 |2001|06/11/2001|08/15/1947|08/15/1947| WP |1242 |2001|06/25/2001|06/12/2001|08/15/1947| S |1243 |1983|11/08/1996|11/04/1996|08/15/1947| S |1243 |1988|02/16/2002|01/19/2002|08/15/1947| SMN |1243 |1991|08/15/1947|08/27/2000|08/15/1947| NMS |1243 |1993|08/26/1996|08/21/1996|08/15/1947| CHS |1243 |1994|12/15/1994|08/29/1996|08/15/1947| NMS |1243 |1994|01/16/1998|01/25/1998|08/15/1947| S |1243 |1994|06/01/1998|02/03/1999|08/15/1947| APP |1243 |1996|11/27/1996|11/26/1996|08/15/1947| CHS |1243 |1996|02/11/1rcumstances to vary the terms and conditions of service of the Corporation's employees. When the two clauses, therefore, say that the Corporation shall have the power to frame regulations in regard to the terms and conditions of its employees including transferred employees, subject, of course, to previous approval of the Central Government, the power may well be exercised in conformity with the provisions of section 11. And if it is so exercised the resultant regulations cannot be said to go beyond the limits specified in the statute. In this view of the matter Hukam Chand etc. v. Union of India and others,(1) and B. S. Vadera v. Union of India & Ors,(2) which lay down that the authority vested with the power of making subordinate legislation must act within the limits of and cannot transgress its power, are of no help to the case of the employees on whose behalf they have been cited.

Another proposition put forward by learned counsel for the employees may be noticed here. It was contended that section 49 conforms on the Corporation "ordinary" powers of framing subordinate legislation and that the Corporation has not been invested with any right to unilaterally promulgate a regulation altering the conditions of service of its employees to their detriment and that such regulations cannot override the provisions of the I. D. Act and the settlements reached thereunder. Reliance for the proposition was placed on U. P. State Electricity Board and Ors. v. Hari Shanker Jaing and Ors.(3) and Bangalore Water-Supply & Sewerage Board, etc. v. R. Rajappa & Others,(4). In the former the case of the employees was that they were governed by the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act which, according to them, was a special Act laying down provision in relation to their conditions of service and which could not, therefore, be superseded by section 79 of the Electricity Supply Act, 1948. In holding that the section last mentioned was a general law which did not override the provisions of the Industrial Employment (Standing Order) Act, this court observed:

"Chapter VII (from section 70 to section 83) which is headed "Miscellaneous" contains various miscellaneous provisions amongst which are section 78 which empowers the Government to make rules and section 79 which empowers the Board to make regulations in respect of matters specified in clauses (a) to (k) of that section. Clause (c) of section 79 is 'the duties of Officers and servants of the Board, and their salaries, allowances and other conditions of service'. This, of course is no more than the ordinary general power, with which every employer is invested in the first instance, to regulate the conditions of service of his employees. It is an ancillary or incidental power of every employer. The Electricity Supply Act does not presume to be an Act to regulate the conditions of service of the employees of State Electricity Boards. It is an Act to regulate the coordination Development of electricity. It is a special Act in regard to the subject of development of electricity, even as the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act in a special Act in regard to the subject of conditions of service of workmen in industrial establishments. If section 79(c) of the Electricity Supply Act generally provides for the making of regulations providing for the conditions of service of the employees of the Board, it can only be regarded as a general provision which must yield to the special provisions of the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act in respect of matters covered by the latter Act."
Quite clearly there was no provision in the Electricity Supply Act such as we find in section 11 of the L. I. C. Act which, as already shown, is a special law in relation to the terms and conditions of service of the employees of the Corporation very much in derogation of what the I. D. Act lays down and the case cited, therefore, presents no parallel to the case in hand.

In Bangalore Water-Supply & Sewerage Board, etc. v. R. Rajappa & others (supra) the question was whether the employees of a statutory Corporation would or would not be governed by the provisions of the I. D. Act. The question was answered in the affirmative by this Court and Beg, C.J., while concurring with Bhagwati, Krishna Iyer and Desai, JJ., on that point, observed:

"I am impressed by the argument that certain public utility services which are carried out by governmental agencies or corporations are treated by the Act itself as within the sphere of industry. If express rules under other enactments govern the relationship between the State as an employer and its servants as employees it may be contended; on the strength of such provisions, that a particular set of employees are outside the scope of the Industrial Disputes Act for that reason. The special excludes the applicability of the general. We cannot forget that we have to determine the meaning of the term 'industry' in the context, of and for the purposes of matters provided for in the Industrial Disputes Act only............ Hence, to artificially exclude State-run industries from the sphere of the Act, unless statutory provisions, expressly or by a necessary implication, have that effect, would not be correct." (emphasis supplied) Far from assisting the case of the employees these observations only support the conclusion arrived at by me above in as much as they specifically state that if express provision has been made under a particular enactment governing the relationship of an employer and his employees, such special provision would govern those employees in supersession of the dictates of the I. D. Act.
9. I thus hold that section 11 and clauses (b) and (bb) of subsection (2) of section 49 of the L. I. C. Act were intended to be and do constitute an exhaustive and overriding law governing the conditions of service of all employees of the Corporation including transferred employees. Proposition (b) forming part of conclusion I is consequently found to be incorrect.

10. Conclusion I reached by the High Court being faulty in both its material aspects, the three corollaries flowing from it and set out above as part of conclusion II must also be held to be unsustainable.

Section 23 of the L. I. C. Act, envisages employment of persons by the Corporation no doubt implies settlement of conditions of service but that does not mean that once a settlement is arrived at the same is not liable to be altered except by another settlement reached under section 18 of the I. D. Act. As already pointed out the provisions of sub-sections (1), (2) and (4) of section 11 of the L. I. C. Act and clauses (b) & (bb) of sub-section (2) of section 49 thereof have overriding effect and the terms and conditions of service of the employees of the Corporation forming part of a settlement under the I. D. Act cannot last after they have been altered in exercise of the powers conferred on the Corporation or the Central Government by those provisions, as was done when the new regulation 58 was framed under section 49 by the Corporation and the new clause 9 was inserted in the 1957 Order by the Central Government. Nor can any action taken under sections 19(2) and 9A of the I. D. Act have any relevance to the exercise of those powers so long as such exercise conforms to the provisions of the L. I. C. Act.

Conclusion II is, therefore, held to be erroneous in its entirety.

11. Conclusion III also does not stand scrutiny as the reliance of the High Court on Madan Mohan Pathak's case (supra) for support to proposition (b) stated above is wholly misplaced. That case was decided by a Bench of seven judges of this Court before whom were canvassed two main points which were thus crystallized by Bhagwati, J., who delivered the judgment on behalf of himself, Iyer and Desai, JJ.:

"A. The right of class III and Class IV employees to annual cash bonus for the years 1st April, 1975 to 31st March, 1976 and 1st April, 1976 to 31st March, 1977, under clause 8(ii) of the Settlement was property and since the impugned Act provided for compulsory acquisition of this property without payment of compensation, the impugned Act was violative of Article 31(2) of the Constitution and was hence null and void."
"3. The impugned Act deprived Class III and Class IV employees of the right to annual cash bonus for the years 1st April, 1975 to 31st March, 1976 and 1st April 1976 to 31st March, 1977, which was vested in them under clause 8(ii) of the Settlement and there was, therefore, clear infringement of their fundamental right under Article 19(1)(f) and since this deprivation of the right to annual cash bonus, which was secured under a Settlement arrived at as a result of collective bargaining and with full and mature deliberation on the part of the Life Insurance Corporation and the Central Government after taking into account the interests of the policy-holders and the community and with a view to approximating towards the goal of a living wage as envisaged in Article 4 of the Constitution, amounted to an unreasonable restriction, the impugned Act was not saved by Article 19(5) and hence it was liable to be struck down as invalid."
In relation to point A the argument raised on behalf of the Corporation was that under the then existing regulation 58 the grant of annual cash bonus was subject to such directions as the Central Government might issue and that the right of Class III and Class IV employees to receive such bonus could not therefore be said to be an absolute right which was not liable to be set at naught by any direction that might be issued by the Central Government. Bhagwati, J., appreciated the force of regulation 58 and remarked:

"Regulation 58 undoubtedly says that non-profit sharing bonus may be granted by the Life Insurance Corporation to its employees, subject to such directions as the Central Government may issue and, therefore, if the Central Government issues a direction to the contrary, non-profit sharing bonus cannot be granted by the Life Insurance Corporation to any class of employees."
He further observed, however:

"But here, in the present case, grant of annual cash bonus by the Life Insurance Corporation to Class III and Class IV employees under Cl. 8(ii) of the Settlement was approved by the Central Government as provided in Cl. 12 and the 'direction' contemplated by Regulation 58 was given by the Central Government that annual cash bonus may be granted as provided in Cl. 8(ii) of the Settlement. It was not competent to the Central Government thereafter to issue another contrary direction which would have the effect of compelling the Life Insurance Corporation to commit a breach of its obligation under S. 18, sub-s. (1) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 to pay annual cash bonus in terms of Cl. 8(ii) of the Settlement."
It was further held by Bhagwati, J., that clause 8(ii) was a clause independent of clause 8(i) and was subject only to the approval mentioned in clause 12(2) which, as already pointed out, had been accorded by the Central Government He went on to hold that the right to bonus for the two years (1st April, 1975 to 31st March, 1976 and 1st April, 1976 to 31st March, 1977) was property of which the concerned employees could not be deprived without adequate compensation. Repelling another argument advanced on behalf of the Corporation, Bhagwati, J., held that the extinguishment of the right to bonus really meant a transfer of ownership to the Corporation of the debt available to the employees under that right and that such extinguishment amounted to acquisition of property without compensation so that it was hit by article 31 (2) of the Constitution of India. In view of this conclusion Bhagwati, J., considered it unnecessary to consider point B. Chandrachud, Fazal Ali and Shinghal, JJ., agreed with the conclusion arrived at by Bhagwati, J., on point A. Beg, C.J., however, delivered a separate judgment seriously doubting the correctness of the proposition enunciated by Bhagwati, J., that the extinguishment of the right to bonus amounted to acquisition of property, and deciding point B in favour of the employees with a finding that in view of the provisions of article 43 of the Constitution the 1976 Act was vitiated by the provisions of article 19(1)(f) of the Constitution and was not saved by clause (6) of that article. Beg, C.J., was further of the opinion that the 1976 Act was violative of article 14 of the Constitution.

Three factors are noteworthy:

(a) Points A and B detailed above were specifically limited to the duration of the settlements as appearing in clause 12 thereof and the judgment, therefore, does not cover any period subsequent to 31st March, 1977, as has been rightly contended by learned counsel for the Corporation.
(b) No finding at all was given nor was any observation made by Bhagwati, J., to the effect that sections 11 and 49 of the L.I.C. Act or the action taken thereunder (the promulgation of the new regulation 58 and the new clause 9 of the 1957 Order) was ineffective against the operation of the provisions of the I.D. Act or of the 1974 settlements. On the other hand, his judgment very specifically proceeded on the ground that the two settlements had to and did fully conform to the provisions of regulation 58 in as much as the Central Government had accorded its approval to them. The High Court thus not only erred in observing that those settlements had been upheld by this Court "even though it did not advert to regulation 58", but also failed to take notice of the clearly expressed opinion of Bhagwati, J., that bonus under the two settlements could not have been paid if they had run counter to the requirements of regulation 58. Far from supporting corollary (b) of conclusion II, therefore, Madan Mohan Pathak's case rules to an opposite effect.
(c) Although Bhagwati, J., did hold clearly (and, if I may say so with all respect, quite correctly) that sub-clause (ii) of clause 8 of the 1974 settlements stood independently of sub-clause (i) thereof, his judgment contains no finding whatsoever to the effect that the conditions of service laid down in those settlements could be varied only by a fresh settlement or award made under the provisions of the I.D. Act and that till then sub-clause (ii) aforesaid would remain in full force. The High Court clearly erred in observing that such a finding formed part of the majority judgment in Madan Mohan Pathak's case.
Conclusion III also, therefore, is negatived.

12. We now take up for consideration the High Court's conclusion IV which is based on the interpretation of section 19 of the I.D. Act by this Court in South Indian Bank Ltd. v. A. R. Chacko (supra). That section may with advantage be extracted here in extenso for facility of reference:

"19(1) A settlement shall come into operation on such date as is agreed upon by the parties to the dispute, and if no date is agreed upon, on the date on which the memorandum of the settlement is signed by the parties to the dispute.
"(2) Such settlement shall be binding for such period as is agreed upon by the parties, and if no such period is agreed upon, for a period of six months from the date on which the memorandum of settlement is signed by the parties to the dispute, and shall continue to be binding on the parties after the expiry of the period aforesaid, until the expiry of two months from the date on which a notice in writing of an intention to terminate the settlement is given by one of the parties to the other party or parties to the settlement.
"(3) An award shall, subject to the provisions of this section, remain in operation for a period of one year from the date on which the award becomes enforceable under section 17A:
"Provided that the appropriate Government may reduce the said period and fix such period as it thinks fit:
"Provided further that the appropriate Government may, before the expiry of the said period, extend the period of operation by any period not exceeding one year at a time as it thinks fit so, however, that the total period of operation of any award does not exceed three years from the date on which it came into operation.
"(4) Where the appropriate Government, whether of its own motion or on the application of any party bound by the award, considers that since the award was made, there has been a material change in the circumstances on which it was based, the appropriate Government may refer the award or a part of it to a Labour Court, if the award was that of a Labour Court or to a Tribunal, if the award was that of a Tribunal or of a National Tribunal for decision whether the period of operation should not, by reason of such change, be shortened and the decision of Labour Court or the Tribunal, as the case may be, on such reference shall be final.
"(5) Nothing contained in sub-section (3) shall apply to any award which by its nature, terms or other circumstances does not impose, after it has been given effect to, any continuing obligation on the parties bound by the award.
"(6) Notwithstanding the expiry of the period of operation under sub-section (3), the award shall continue to be binding on the parties until a period of two months has elapsed from the date on which notice is given by any party bound by the award to the other party or parties intimating its intention to terminate the award.
"(7) No notice given under sub-section (2) or sub-
section (6) shall have effect unless it is given by a party representing the majority of persons bound by the settlement or award, as the case may be."

Sub-section (2) of the section makes it clear that a settlement reached under the I.D. Act shall be binding on the parties thereto-

(a) for the period agreed upon, and if no such period is agreed upon for a period of six months from the date on which the memorandum of settlement is signed by the parties; and

(b) for a further period ending with a span of two months reckoned from the date on which a notice in writing of an intention to terminate the settlement is given by one of the parties thereto to the others.

Sub-sections (3), (4) and (5) provide for the period of operation of an award and its extension and reduction, while sub-section (6) lays down that after such period has expired the award shall continue to be binding on the parties to it for a further period ending with a span of two months reckoned in the same manner as the span mentioned earlier.

In so far as the explicit language of the section is concerned there is no ambiguity involved. The difficulty arises regarding the period (hereinafter called the 3rd period) subsequent to the date on which the said span of two months expires in either case, because the I.D. Act is silent about it and it is that difficulty which this Court resolved in Chacko's case. The parties before the Court in that case were the South Indian Bank Ltd. and one of its clerks named A. R. Chacko who had been promoted as an accountant with effect from the 13th July 1959 and claimed certain allowances for periods subsequent to that date in terms of what is called the Sastry award. On behalf of the Bank reliance was placed on section 4 of the Industrial Disputes (Banking Companies) Decision Act, 1955 which runs thus:

"Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, or the Industrial Disputes (Appellate Tribunal) Act, 1950 the award as now modified by the decision of the Labour Appellate Tribunal in the manner referred to in section 3 shall remain in force until March 31, 1959."
and a contention was raised that the non-obstante clause contained in this section made the provisions of section 19(6) of the I.D. Act inapplicable to the Sastry award which therefore, became dead for all purposes after the 31st March, 1959. Repelling the contention this Court observed:

"The effect of section 4 of the Industrial Disputes (Banking Companies) Decision Act is that the award ceased to be in force after March 31, 1959. That however has nothing to do with the question as to the period for which it will remain binding on the parties thereafter. The provision in section 19(6) as regards the period for which the award shall continue to be binding on the parties is not in any way affected by section 4 of the Industrial Disputes (Banking Companies) Decision Act, 1955."
The Court then proceeded to consider specifically the situation that would obtain in the 3rd period in relation to an award and held:

"Quite apart from this, however, it appears to us that even if an award has ceased to be in operation or in force and has ceased to be binding on the parties under the provisions of section 19(6) it will continue to have its effect as a contract between the parties that has been made by industrial adjudication in place of the old contract. So long as the award remains in operation under section 19(3), section 23(c) stands in the way of any strike by the workmen and lock-out by the employer in respect of any matter covered by the award. Again so long as the award is binding on a party, breach of any of its terms will make the party liable to penalty under section 29 of the Act, to imprisonment which may extend to six months or with fine or with both. After the period of its operation and also the period for which the award is binding have elapsed section 23 and section 29 can have no operation. We can however see nothing in the scheme of the Industrial Disputes Act to justify a conclusion that merely because these special provisions as regards prohibition of strikes and lock-outs and of penalties for breach of award cease to be effective the new contract as embodied in the award should also cease to be effective. On the contrary, the very purpose for which industrial adjudication has been given the peculiar authority and right of making new contracts between employers and workmen makes it reasonable to think that even though the period of operation of the award and the period for which it remains binding on the parties-in respect of both of which special provisions have been made under sections 23 and 29 respectively-may expire, the new contract would continue to govern the relations between the parties till it is displaced by another contract. The objection that no such benefit as claimed could accrue to the respondent after March 31, 1959 must therefore be rejected." (emphasis supplied) It is the underlined portion of this paragraph which impelled the High Court to come to the conclusion that even a notice under section 19(6) of the I.D. Act would not terminate a settlement (which, according to the High Court, stands on the same footing as an award and, in fact is indistinguishable therefrom for the purpose of section 19) but would have the effect of merely paving the way for fresh negotiations resulting ultimately in a new settlement- a conclusion which has been seriously challenged on behalf of the Corporation with the submission that Chacko's case has no application whatsoever to the present controversy in as much as the special law comprised of section 11 and 49 of the L.I.C. Act fully covers the situation in the 3rd period following the expiry of the 1974 settlements. The submission is well based. In Chacko's case this Court was dealing with the provisions of the I.D. Act alone when it made the observations last extracted and was not concerned with a situation which would cover the 3rd period in relation to an award (or for that matter a settlement) in accordance with a specific mandate from Parliament. The only available course for filling the void created by the Sastry award was a continuation of its terms till they were replaced by something else legally enforceable which, in the circumstances before the Court, could only be another contract (in the shape of an award or a settlement), there being no legal provision requiring the void to be filled otherwise. In the present case the law intervenes to indicate how the void which obtains in the 3rd period shall be filled and, if it has been so filled, there is no question of its being filled in the manner indicated in Chacko's case wherein, as already pointed out, no such law was available. The observations in that case must thus be taken to mean that the expired award would continue to govern the parties till it is displaced by another contract or by a relationship otherwise substituted for it in accordance with law.
13. Indian Link Chain Manufacturers Ltd. v. Their Workmen which also the High Court pressed into service in arriving at conclusion IV is really not relevant for the present discussion as it deals only with the two periods expressly covered by sub-sections (2) and (6) of section 19 of the I.D. Act and not at all with the 3rd period. The same is true of Shukla Manseta Industries Pvt. Ltd. v. The Workmen Employed under it in which the only question canvassed before the Court and answered by it was whether the law required that notice of termination under section 19(2) had to be given only after the date of expiry of a settlement. However, it may be pointed out that in both those cases as also in Haribhau Shinde and another v. F. H. Lala Industrial Tribunal, Bombay and another, which has been relied upon by learned counsel for the employees, this Court was not concerned with any special law as I find in a combined reading of sections 11 and 49 of the L.I.C. Act; and for that reason also none of these three decisions is of any assistance for the determination of the point in controversy before us.

14. Some arguments were addressed to us on a proposition advanced by learned counsel for the Corporation to the effect that a settlement could not be treated at par with an award for the purpose of the I.D. Act and that Chacko's case, therefore, could furnish no proper basis for the High Court's conclusion IV. I do not propose to deal with that proposition which is merely of academic interest in view of the material distinction already pointed out, namely, that in the present case there is a special mandate by Parliament to fill the void of the 3rd period which did not obtain in Chacko's case. However, I may briefly dwell on another aspect of the same distinction and that consists of the circumstance that while in Chacko's case the employer was the South Indian Bank Ltd.-a non-statutory banking company-the employer before us now is the creation of the L.I.C. Act itself and therefore a statutory corporation. This circumstance coupled with the contents of the L.I.C. Act leads to the following deductions, as laid down in Suchdev Singh & Ors v. Bhagataram Sardar Singh Raghuvanshi and anr.(1).

(a) The Corporation carries on the exclusive business of life insurance as an agency of the Government by which it is managed and which alone can dissolve it. It is, therefore, an authority within the meaning of article 12 of the Constitution of India. The status of persons serving the Corporation thus carries with it the element of public employment.

(b) The L.I.C. Act enables the Corporation to make regulations which may provide, inter alia for the terms and conditions of service of its employees. Such regulations cannot be equated with those framed by a company incorporated under the Companies Act and, on the other hand, have the force of law which must be followed both by the Corporation and those who deal with it.

It is obvious that an application of these deductions to the situation prevailing in the present case would rule out the relevance of Chacko's case because regulation 58 framed under section 49 of the L.I.C. Act specifically governs the 3rd period following the expiry of the 1974 settlements.

15. I need not go into the correctness or otherwise of conclusion V reached by the High Court as no arguments in relation thereto were addressed to us. I shall now proceed, however, to discuss certain other contentions raised before us on behalf of the employees although the same were not canvassed before the High Court.

16. It was argued that both sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 11 of the L.I.C. Act relate exclusively to the case of employees and that sub-section (2) does not embrace the case of employees recruited under section 23. In this connection an analysis of section 11 would be helpful. In so far as sub-section (1) is concerned it is quite clear that it cannot be extended to cover employees recruited under section 23, and that it is restricted in its operation only to the transferred employees. This follows from the clear language used. Sub-section (2) however, is differently worded. It may be split up as follows:

(a) The Central Government may alter (whether by way of reduction or otherwise) the remuneration and the other terms and conditions of service (of .............) to such extent and in such manner as it thinks fit.
(b) The Central Government may take the action detailed in (a) above notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or the I.D. Act, or in any other law for the time being in force or in any award, settlement or agreement for the time being in force.
(c) The action detailed in (a) can be taken only if the Central Government is satisfied-
(i) that for the purpose of securing uniformity in the scales of remuneration and the other terms and conditions of service applicable to transferred employees, it is necessary so to do;
or
(ii) that, in the interests of the Corporation and its policyholders a reduction in the remuneration payable or a revision of the other terms and conditions of service applicable, to employees or any class of them is called for.
According to learned counsel for the employees the expression "employees or any class of them" occurring in sub-clause (i) of the above analysis must be interpreted to mean transferred employees or any class thereof and the expression does not cover the employees recruited under section 23. Support for the contention is sought from the circumstance that the section is not only a part of Chapter IV of the L.I.C. Act, which is headed "Transfer of existing Life Insurance Business to the Corporation" but also carries the marginal note "Transfer of service of existing employees of insurers to the Corporation". This circumstance is wholly immaterial not only for the reason that headings of chapters and marginal notes cannot be looked into for the purpose of ascertaining the intention of the Legislature unless the language employed by it is ambiguous but also because the absorption of the transferred employees into the Corporation may itself necessitate a change in the conditions of service of the employees recruited under section 23. It is not disputed that transferred employees, amongst themselves, were governed by widely different conditions of service and that was so for the simple reason that they had come from different companies, each having its own scales of pay applicable to its servants. Then the Corporation came into existence, recruitment under section 23 need not have waited for action under section 11(2) and the process of examination of different scales of pay of the transferred employees as compared to those pertaining to hands recruited under section 23, as also the appropriate action which should have been taken as a result of such examination, was bound to be time- consuming; and the result may well have entailed a decision to equalise the scales of pay not only by raising or reducing those of the transferred employees but also those of the employees recruited under section 23. And that appears to be only reason why the legislature chose the comprehensive expression "employees or any class of them" in sub-section (2) in spite of the fact that not only in sub- sections (1) and (4) but also in sub-section (2) itself the detailed description "employee of an insurer whose controlled business has been transferred to and vested in the Corporation" or words to that effect have been used to denote a transferred employee. Again, wherever a transferred employee was meant but a detailed description in relation to him was not given, the expression "such employee" was used with reference to that description. Examples in point are the proviso to sub section (1) and the latter part of sub- section (4). If the expression "employees or any class of them" was intended to be restricted to transferred employees, it would certainly have been preceded by the word 'such' so that it could be referable to the detailed description of employees of that kind occurring in an earlier part of the sub section. From the circumstance that no such device was pressed into service the conclusion is irresistible that the expression last mentioned was intended to convey a meaning different from that which was deducible from the detailed description otherwise employed in the section- a conclusion based on the well-known principle of interpretation of statutes thus stated by Maxwell in Chapter 12 of his celebrated work earlier cited:

"From the general presumption that the same expression is presumed to be used in the same sense throughout an Act or a series of cognate Acts, there follows the further presumption that a change of working denotes a change in meaning."
17. The matter may also be looked at from another angle. As stated in clause (c) of the above analysis the Central Government is empowered to take action under sub- section (2) of section 11 if it is satisfied about the existence of either of two conditions. It may take such action if it is satisfied that for the purpose of securing uniformity in the scales of remuneration, etc., applicable to transferred employees it is necessary to do so. But then if no action is intended to be taken for that purpose it may still be taken provided the Central Government is satisfied that it is in the interests of the Corporation and its policy-holders to make a reduction in the remuneration payable or a revision of the other terms and conditions applicable to its employees. Now the first condition which envisages the securing of uniformity in the scales of remuneration clearly applies to transferred employees only but the same is not true of the second condition. At a particular juncture in the life of the Corporation it may become necessary to make a reduction in the remuneration payable to its employees or a revision of the other terms and conditions of service applicable to them. But then this must follow from the satisfaction of the Government that it is in the interest of the Corporation and its policy-holders to do so. It is obvious that this condition envisages the change in conditions of service, etc., of all the employees of the Corporation and not only transferred employees. If it were otherwise the sub-section may well lead to discrimination and render the provision unconstitutional. Even if, therefore, the expression "employees or any class of them" occurring in sub-section (2) was capable of being regarded as ambiguous, the Court would choose that interpretation which would conform to the constitutionality of the provision. This well known principle of satutory construction was made use of by a learned single Judge of the Calcutta High Court in Himrangsu Chakraborty and others v. Life Insurance Corporation of India and others(1) wherein he dealt with sub-section 11(2) thus:

"According to Mr. Chatterjee section 11(2) of the Act contains two limbs. The first limb confers power on the Central Government to revise the terms and conditions of service of the employees of the Corporation. Its power is, however, confined only to those employees whose services have been transferred to and vested in the Corporation by reason of the commencement of the Act. The second limb confers power on the Central Government to alter the terms and conditions of the service applicable to all employees of the Corporation irrespective of whether they are transferred employees or are directly recruited after the inception of the Corporation. Strong emphasis is placed on the expression 'terms and conditions of service applicable to employees of insurers whose controlled business has been transferred to and vested in the Corporation' and 'terms and conditions of service applicable to employees or any class of them'. Mr. Chatterjee submits that the latter clause does not contain the expression 'such employees' and therefore should be construed to confer a power on the Central Government to alter the conditions of service of all employees..... In my view, this contention of Mr. Chatterjee is sound and should be accepted. On a plain reading of section 11(2) of the Act it seems to contain two distinct and separate powers. The first part relates to the power of the Central Government in relation to "transferred employees" whereas the second part appears to apply to all employees of the Corporation irrespective of whether they are transferred or directly recruited."
I find myself in complete agreement with this view for the reasons already stated.

18. In order to steer clear of the above interpretation of section 11(2) learned counsel for the employees put forward the argument that the word 'for' occurring in the section should not be read as a disjunctive and should be given the meaning 'and' so that the two clauses forming the conditions about which the Central Government has to be satisfied before it can act under the section are taken to be one single whole; but we do not see any reason why the plain meaning of the word should be distorted to suit the convenience or the cause of the employees. It is no doubt true that the word 'or' may be interpreted as 'and' in certain extraordinary circumstances such as in a situation where its use as a disjunctive could obviously not have been intended. (see Mazagaon Dock Ltd. v. The Commissioner of Income-tax and Excess Profits Tax.(1) Where no compelling reason for the adoption of such a course is however, available, the word 'or' must be given its ordinary meaning, that is, as a disjunctive. This rule was thus applied to the interpretation of clause (c) of section 3(1) of the U.P. (Temporary) Control of Rent and Eviction Act, 1947 in Babu Manohan Das Shah & Ors. v. Bishun Das,(2) by Shelat, J:

"The clause is couched in simple and unambiguous language and in its plain meaning provided that it would be a good ground enabling a landlord to sue for eviction without the permission of the district Magistrate if the tenant has made or has permitted to be made without the landlord's consent in writing such construction which materially alters the accommodation or is likely substantially to diminish its value. The language of the clause makes it clear that the legislature wanted to lay down two alternatives which would furnish a ground to the landlord to sue without the District Magistrate's permission, that is, where the tenant has made such construction which would materially alter the accommodation or which would be likely to substantially diminish its value. The ordinary rule of construction is provision of a statute must be construed in accordance with the language used therein unless there are compelling reasons, such as where a literal construction would reduce the provision to absurdity or prevent the manifest intention of the legislature from being carried out. There is no reason why the word 'or should be construed otherwise than in its ordinary meaning."
In my view this reasoning is fully applicable to the case in hand and there is every reason why the word 'or' should be given its ordinary meaning. This was also the view taken by a learned single Judge of the Madras High Court in K. S. Ramaswamy and anr. v. Union of India and ors.(1), of which I fully approve.

19. Still another argument calculated to mould the interpretation of section 11(2) in favour of the employees was that the power conferred on the Central Government by it was intended to be used only once and that too for one purpose, namely, to achieve uniformity in the scales of pay, etc. In this connection our attention was drawn to two factors, namely, that the words 'from time to time' forming part of the section as it originally stood were deleted therefrom when it was amended in 1957 and that while the amendment of the section at that time was under

consideration of Parliament the then Finance Minister had given an assurance in that behalf. The argument is wholly unacceptable to me. One good reason is available in the provisions of section 14 of the General Clauses Act which runs thus:
"14(1) Where, by any Central Act or Regulation made after the commencement of this Act, any power is conferred, then unless a different intention appears, that power may be exercised from time to time as occasion requires.
"(2) This section applies also to all Central Acts and Regulations made on or after the fourteenth day of January, 1887."
In view of the clear language of the section, no Central law, while conferring a power, need say in so many words that such power may be exercised from time to time; and if a law does make use of such an expression that would not change the position. The deletion of such an expression by the legislature at a given point of time may, therefore, follow the detection of the superfluity and that would not mean, all by itself, that the legislature intended to limit the exercise of such power to a single occasion. This is precisely the view that was taken by this Court in a similar situation in Vasantlal Maganbhai Sanjanwala v. The State of Bombay and Others(1). In that case the Court was dealing with section 6(2) of the Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act, 1948, which ran thus:

"The Provincial Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, fix a lower rate of the maximum rent payable by the tenants of lands situate in any particular area or may fix such rate on any other suitable basis as it thinks fit."
It was pointed out to the Court that in this section the words 'from time to time' which found a place in the corresponding section of the earlier tenancy legislation were missing although the expression 'from time to time' was retained in section 8(1) of the Act. The contention raised was that the power delegated under section 6(2) was intended to be used only once but was rejected as fallacious with the following observations:

"Why the Legislature did not use the words 'from time to time" in section 6(2) when it used them in section 8(1) it is difficult to understand; but in construing section 6(2) it is obviously necessary to apply the provisions of section 14 of the Bombay General Clauses Act, 1904 (I of 1904). Section 14 provides that where by any Bombay Act made after the commencement of this Act any power is conferred on any Government then that power may be exercised from time to time as occasion requires. Quite clearly if section 6(2) is read in the light of section 14 of the Bombay General Clauses Act it must follow that the power to issue a notification can be exercised from time to time as occasion requires. It is true that section 14 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 (X of 1897), provides that where any power is conferred by any Central Act or Regulation then, unless a different intention appears, that power may be exercised from time to time as occasion requires. Since there is a specific provision of the Bombay General Clauses Act relevant on the point it is unnecessary to take recourse to section 14 of the Central General Clauses Act; but even if we were to assume that the power in question can be exercised from time to time unless a different intention appears we would feel no difficulty in holding that no such different intention can be attributed to the Legislature when it enacted section 6(2). It is obvious that having prescribed for a maximum by section 6(1) the Legislature has deliberately provided for a modification of the said maximum rent and that itself shows that the fixation of any maximum rent was not treated as immutable. If it was necessary to issue one notification under section 6(2) it would follow by force of the same logic that circumstances may require the issue of a further notification. The fixation of agricultural rent depends upon so many uncertain factors-which may vary from time to time and from place to place that it would be idle to contend that the Legislature wanted to fix the maximum only once, or, as Mr. Limaye concedes, twice. Therefore the argument that the power to issue a notification has been exhausted cannot be sustained."
The language of section 14 of the General Clauses Act being identical with that of the Bombay General Clauses Act this reasoning is fully applicable to the interpretation of section 11(2) of the L.I.C. Act. The same view was taken by a Division Bench of the Gujarat High Court in Harivadan K. Desai and others v. Life Insurance Corporation of India and others(1), in the following words:

"While construing a statutory provision, it is not permissible to traverse beyond the language of the provision unless the legislative intent cannot be gathered from the clear and definite language of the provision. It is true that often Courts do look into the debates in the Legislature and also the marginal notes to ascertain the scope of a particular provision of the statute. But that is only in exceptional cases. The language of section 11(2) is very clear. There is nothing to indicate or suggest even remotely that the powers vested in the Central Government under section 11(2) get exhausted when once the Central Government exercises that power. Section 14 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 further strengthens our view. Section 14 lays down that where by an Central Act or Regulation made after the commencement of the Act, any power is conferred, then unless a different intention appears, that power may be exercised from time to time as occasion requires. We are unable to gather any different intention from section 11(2) so as to injunct the Government from exercising their power after the issuance of the Blue Order; in other words, after they once exercised that power."
20. I may further point out that part of the power to alter the terms and conditions of service of the Corporation's employees which the Central Government is authorised to exercise in the interests of the Corporation and its policy-holders must of necessity be a power which can be exercised as and when occasion so requires. A contrary view would lead to absurd results in certain given situations. Let us assume that the affairs of the Corporation did not present a rosy picture to begin with and that therefore, a drastic reduction in the scales of pay of its employees was called for and was achieved by an order made by the Central Government in exercise of its power under section 11(2). Does that mean that if later on the Corporation develops its business and makes sizeable progress in the way of earning profits, the power conferred on the Central Government would not be exerciseable to give better pay scales to the employees? An answer to this question in the negative would obviously not meet the exigencies of the situation and in my opinion leads to an absurdity. Again, if the scales of remuneration of the transferred employees are adjusted by the Central Government so as to smooth out anomalies and discrepancies, would that put an end to the exercise of the power so that it cannot be used subsequently for the amelioration of the service conditions of the employees when the affairs of the Corporation so warrant? To put such a restricted meaning on the language used does not appear to be warranted for any reason whatsoever.

21. In so for as the proceedings of Parliament and speeches made during the course thereof are concerned, they are not admissible for the purpose of interpretation of the resultant statute unless the language used therein is ambiguous and impels the Court to resort to factors outside the statute for the purpose of ascertaining the intention of the law-makers. This is what was clearly held this Court in Anandji Haridas & Co. Pvt. Ltd. v. Engineering Mazdoor Sangh & Anr.,(1) by Sarkaria, J. who delivered the judgment on behalf of himself and Alagiriswami,J., and the observations made therein are worth repetition:

"As a general principle of interpretation, where the words of a statute are plain, precise and unambiguous, the intention of the Legislature is to be gathered from the language of the statute itself and no external evidence such as Parliamentary Debates, Reports of the Committees of the Legislatures or even the statement made by the Minister on the introduction of a measure or by the framers of the Act is admissible to construe those words. It is only where a statute is not exhaustive or where its language is ambiguous, uncertain, clouded or susceptible of more than one meaning or shades of meaning, that external evidence as to the evils, if any, which the statute was intended to remedy, or of the circumstances which led to the passing of the statute may be looked into for the purpose of ascertaining the object which the Legislature had in view in using the words in question."
These observations amply cover the situation in hand. Section 11(2) suffers from no ambiguity either by reason of the omission therefrom of the expression "from time to time"

or otherwise and it is, therefore, not permissible for a reference to be made to the speech of the then Finance Minister in the matter of interpretation of the section.
22. The next contention for the employees which raises a question of the vires of clause 9 of the 1957 order and of regulation 58 is based on the following passage in the judgment of Beg, C.J., in M. M. Pathak's case (supra):

"He submits that article 43 casts an obligation on the State to secure a living wage for the workers and is part of the principles "declared fundamental in the governance of the country". In other words, he would have us use article 43 as conferring practically a fundamental right which can be enforced. I do not think that we can go so far as that because, even though the directive principles of State policy, including the very important general ones contained in article 38 and 39 of the Constitution, give the direction in which the fundamental policies of the State must be oriented, yet, we cannot direct either the Central Government or Parliament to proceed in that direction. Article 37 says that they 'shall not be enforceable by any court, but the principles therein laid down are nevertheless fundamental in the governance of the country and it shall be the duty of the State to apply these principles in making laws.' Thus, even if they are not directly enforceable by a court they cannot be declared ineffective. They have the life and force of fundamentals. The best way in which they can be, without being directly enforced, given vitality and effect in Courts of law is to use them as criteria of reasonableness, and therefore, of validity, as we have been doing. Thus, if progress towards goals found in articles 38 and 39 and 43 is desired, there should not be any curtailment of wage rates arbitrarily without disclosing any valid reason for it as is the case here. It is quite reasonable, in my opinion, to submit that the measure which seeks to deprive workers of the benefits of a settlement arrived at and assented to by the Central Government, under the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act, should not be set at naught by an Act designed to defeat a particular settlement. If this be the purpose of the Act, as it evidently is, it could very well be said to be contrary to public interest, and therefore, not protected by article 19(6) of the Constitution."
These observations are of no help to the case of the employees as they were made in relation to the change of conditions of service of employees in an industrial establishment under a settlement which was then in operation and therefore, covered only the first period mentioned in section 19(2) of the I.D. Act--a period with which we are not concerned. As pointed out by Bhagwati, J., in his separate judgment, the bonus for the period up to the 31st March 1977 had actually vested in the employees and had become a debt due to them and that was why the majority of six held that the 1976 Act was violative of article 31, a view which Beg, C. J., doubted. Besides, the opinion expressed in the observations just above extracted, was perhaps not shared by the other six judges who chose not to decide the question as to whether the 1976 Act was or was not hit by articles 14 and 19 of the Constitution of India. In these premises the employees cannot draw any benefit from Beg, C. J.'s observations. On the other hand, no challenge to the vires of section 11(2) was made from either side and so long as the section itself is good the exercise of the power conferred by it cannot be attacked unless such exercise goes beyond the limits of the section, either in its content or manner. If the legislature was competent to confer a power on the Central Government to alter the conditions of service of the employees of the Corporation to their detriment or otherwise, the fact that the power was exercised only to cut down bonus would furnish no reason for striking down clause 9 of the 1957 order or regulation 58 as being violative of article 14 or 19.

23. Clause 9 of the 1957 order was also attacked as contravening articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India for the reason that it applied only to transferred employees who were discriminated against in the matter of equality before the law and of opportunity of employment. That clause no doubt takes within its sweep only transferred employees because clause 2 of the 1957 order specifically states that the order is restricted in its operation to employees of that category; but then no question of any discrimination whatsoever is involved in as much as the transferred employees have not only not been treated differently from other employees of the Corporation but by reason of regulation 58 they have been placed fully at par with the latter. The argument would have had plausibility only in the absence of regulation 58 (which applies to all the employees of the Corporation) and is wholly devoid of force.

24. Another attack levelled against clause 9 was that it suffered from a contravention of the well-known maxim delegatus non potest delegare. It was urged that the Central Government having been invested with the power of altering the terms and conditions of service of the employees of the Corporation, it was bound in law to exercise that power itself and that it could not delegate that power to the Corporation as it has done in clause 9. This argument is again without substance. The clause itself states in unmistakable terms that the Corporation may grant non-profit sharing bonus to its employees in respect of any particular year subject to the previous approval of the Central Government, and so the real bonus-granting authority remains the Central Government and not the Corporation. There is thus no delegation of any real power to the Corporation through the promulgation of clause 9.

25. Clause 9 was also challenged on the ground that although the notification promulgating it began with the preamble "whereas the Central Government is satisfied that in the interests of the Corporation and its policy-holders it is necessary to revise the terms and conditions of service.. " there is nothing to show that the Central Government was actually so satisfied. This is a stand which cannot be allowed to be raised at this late stage in as much as it involves questions of fact. which cannot be determined without the Central Government being given a full opportunity to rebut it. Had the contention been raised before the High Court, documentary evidence could have been produced to establish that the requirement of the section had been fully met in regard to the relevant satisfaction of the Central Government. Again, in the absence of any evidence to the contrary, it is permissible to presume that official acts have been regularly performed and that the preamble to the notification, therefore, is in accord with facts.

26. Another contention raised on behalf of the employees was that the new clause 9 and the new regulation 58 were both hit by the provisions of articles 14 and 19 of the Constitution of India in as much as they singled out the employees of only one statutory corporation for a special rule regarding bonus in derogation of the terms hithertofore prevailing, no other Corporation in the public sector having been so touched. The contention cannot prevail in the absence of evidence that the total emoluments of any employee to be affected by the new clause and the new regulation (regardless of bonus) would be less than those of his counterpart in any other statutory corporation. In this connection also we may point out that the contention was not raised before the High Court and no foundation was laid for it at any stage.

27. The only other contention raised on behalf of the employee was that regulation 58 could not operate to make in-applicable the 1974 settlements to the 3rd period in as much as all settlements reached under the I.D. Act were protected by the provisions of regulation 2 which thus specifies the employees of Corporation to whom the 1960 regulations apply:

"2. They shall apply to every wholetime salaried employee of the Corporation in India unless otherwise provided by the terms of any contract, agreement or letter of appointment."
It is impossible to accept the argument under examination in view of the language of regulation 2 which merely signifies the persons to whom the regulations are to apply. When it says that it shall apply to every wholetime employee of the Corporation "unless otherwise provided by the terms of any contract, agreement or letter of appointment", all that it means is that if a contract, agreement or letter of appointment contains a term stating that the concerned employee or employees shall not be governed by the regulations, then such employee or employees shall not be so governed. Regulation 2 is definitely not susceptible of the interpretation that if a settlement has been reached between the Corporation and its employees, the regulations shall not apply to them even though the settlement makes no provision in that behalf. It is nobody's case that the 1974 settlements contain any such provision and regulation 2, therefore, does not come into play at all.

28. In the result appeal No. 2275 of 1978 succeeds and is accepted. The impugned judgment is set aside and the petition under article 226 of the Constitution of India decided thereby is dismissed along with transfer case No. 1 of 1979. In the circumstances of the case, however, the parties are left to bear their own costs.

ORDER In view of the opinion expressed by the majority, the appeal is dismissed with costs to the first, second and third respondents, and the Transfer Petition No. 1 of 1979 stands allowed insofar that a writ will issue to the Life Insurance Corporation directing it to give effect to the terms of the settlements of 1974 relating to bonus until superseded by a fresh settlement, an industrial award or relevant legislation. Costs in respect of the Transfer Petition will be paid to the petitioners by the second respondent.

V.D.K.					  Appeal dismissed.

================================================================================


================================================================================
CASE 29:
[Cites 29, Cited by 471]
Supreme Court of India
Executive Committee Of Vaish Degree ... vs Lakshmi Narain And Ors on 12 December, 1975
Equivalent citations: 1976 AIR 888, 1976 SCR (2)1006, AIR 1976 SUPREME COURT 888, 1976 2 SCC 58, 1976 LAB. I. C. 576, 1976 2 SCR 1006, 1976 2 LABLJ 163, 1976 2 SCWR 588, 1976 (1) LABLN 474, (1976) 1 SERV L R 213
Author: Syed Murtaza Fazalali
Bench: Syed Murtaza Fazalali, Hans Raj Khanna, P.N. Bhagwati
           PETITIONER:
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE OF VAISH DEGREE COLLEGE SHAMLI ANDOTHERS

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
LAKSHMI NARAIN AND ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT12/12/1975

BENCH:
FAZALALI, SYED MURTAZA
BENCH:
FAZALALI, SYED MURTAZA
KHANNA, HANS RAJ
BHAGWATI, P.N.

CITATION:
 1976 AIR  888		  1976 SCR  (2)1006
 1976 SCC  (2)	58
 CITATOR INFO :
 AP	    1976 SC1073	 (1)
 RF	    1976 SC2216	 (7)
 F	    1977 SC 747	 (17)
 R	    1981 SC 122	 (5)
 RF	    1981 SC 212	 (54)
 F	    1987 SC1422	 (10,14)
 D	    1989 SC1607	 (11)
 D	    1990 SC 415	 (16,22)
 F	    1991 SC1525	 (9)


ACT:
     Master and	 servant-Managing  Committee  of  a  college
terminating services  of Principal  of college-Violation  of
rule   requiring    Vice-Chancellor's	approval-Rights	  of
Principal.
     Specified Relief-Declaration  of continuing  in service
when may be granted.



HEADNOTE:
     The  appellant   is  the	Executive  Committee  of  an
Educational Institution	 (a college)  registered  under	 the
Registration of	 Co-operative Societies Act, and the college
was affiliated	to  a  University.  The	 provisions  of	 the
University Act require that every decision of the management
of an  affiliated college  to remove  from service a teacher
shall be  reported  forthwith  to  the	Vice-Chancellor	 and
subject to  the provisions contained in the Statutes made by
the University, shall not take effect unless approved by the
Vice-Chancellor.
     The respondent  was appointed  by the  appellant  as  a
Principal of  the college but no agreement, as prescribed by
the University	Act, and  the Statutes	was executed between
the parties.  Two years after his appointment. the appellant
served a  notice on  the  Principal  directing	him  not  to
discharge the duties of the Principal and shortly thereafter
terminated his	services. Thereafter, the respondent did not
work as	 Principal. The	 respondent filed  a suit contending
that he must be deemed to be continuing in service, as there
was no	sanction of  the Vice-Chancellor for the termination
of his	services, and  prayed for  an injunction restraining
the appellant  from interfering with his duties as Principal
of the institution.
     The trial	Court  dismissed  the  suit  but  the  first
appellate Court	 reversed the  decision and  the High  Court
affirmed the decision of the first appellate Court.
     In appeal to this Court, it was contended that: (1) the
appellant was not a statutory body; (2) in the absence of an
agreement the  requirement regarding  the  approval  by	 the
Vice-Chancellor would  not apply  and the termination of the
respondent's services  would be governed by the usual master
and  servant   relationship.  (3)   there  are	 no  special
circumstances  for   enforcing	the   contract	of  personal
service; and  (4) the  present case  was not  a fit  one for
granting  the  reliefs	prayed	for,  they  being  equitable
reliefs and in the discretion of the Court.
     Allowing the appeal to this Court,
^
     HELD. (Per Khanna and Fazal Ali, JJ.).
     (1)  Merely  because  the	appellant  followed  certain
statutory provisions  of the  University Act or the Statutes
made thereunder,  it cannot  be held to be a statutory body.
[1014 A-B]
     (a) Before	 an institution	 can be a statutory body, it
must be	 created  by  or  under	 the  statute  and  owe	 its
existence to  a statute.  There is a well-marked distinction
between a  body which  is created  by the statute and a body
which, after  having come  into existence,  is	governed  in
accordance with	 the provisions of the statute. The question
in such	 cases to  be asked is, if there is no statute would
the institution	 have any  legal existence. If the answer is
in the negative, then undoubtedly it is a statutory body but
if the	institution has	 a separate  existence	of  its	 own
without any reference to the statute concerned but is merely
governed by  the statutory  provisions, it cannot be said to
be a statutory body. [1013 D-1014 A]
1007
Sukhdev Singh & Ors. v. Bhagatram Sardar Singh Raghuvanshi &
Others, [1975] 3 S.C.R. 619, followed.
     (b) Merely because it was affiliated to the University.
that  there   were  certain   mandatory	 provisions  of	 the
University Act	which were binding on the appellant; and the
appellant was  governed by  the Statutes  of the  University
would not be sufficient to alter the character and nature of
the appellant and convert it into a statutory body. [1014 B-
C]
     (i) The appellant had an independent status having been
registered under  the Registration of Co-operative Societies
Act and	 was a	self-governed or  an autonomous body. It was
affiliated  to	 the  University  merely  for  the  sake  of
convenience and mainly for the purpose of recognition of its
courses of study by the University. [1014 C-D]
     (ii) All  that Statute  14A of  the University required
was that  the Managing	Committee of the college must co-opt
the Principal  of the  college and  a representative  of the
teachers. By  co-opting them  the appellant did not lose its
independent status  but continued  to remain a non-statutory
and , autonomous body. [1011 F-G]
     (iii) Similarly,  the fact	 that the  Statutes  of	 the
University were	 adopted by  the appellant  and it was, as a
matter of  convention, bound to follow the provisions of the
University Act,	 would	not  clothe  the  appellant  with  a
statutory status  or character. The adoption of the Statutes
was  only  for	better	governance  and	 administration	 and
extension of  the educational activities of the institution.
[1014 G-H] D
     Sabhajit Tewary  v. Union	of India  &  ors.  [1975]  3
S.C.R.	616   and  Kumari  Regina  v.  St.  Aloysius  Higher
Elementary School & Anr. [1971] Supp. S.C.R. 6, followed.
     (2) The case of P.R. Jodh v. A.L. Pande [1965] 2 S.C.R.
713, on which the High Court relied, is distinguishable. The
High Court  has not  considered the  basic facts  present in
that case,  but which  are not	present in the instant case,
namely, (a)  the governing  body in Jodh's case was itself a
creature of  the  statute;  (b)	 in  the  instant  case	 the
Statutes did  not apply	 proprio vigore	 but only  after  an
agreement was executed between the employer and the employee
as required  by those  provisions. and	(c) no agreement was
ever executed  between the  parties in	the prescribed form.
[1018 C-D]
     Vidya Ram Mishra v. Managing Committee, Shri Jai Narain
College, [1972] 3 S.C.R. 320, 326. followed.
     (3)(a) A contract of personal service cannot ordinarily
be specifically	 enforced and  a Court,	 normally, would not
give a	declaration that  the contract subsists and that the
employee even after having been removed from service, can be
deemed to  be in service against the will and consent of the
employer. This	rule is	 subject to  three  exceptions,	 (i)
where a	 public servant is sought to be removed from service
in contravention of the provisions of Art. 311. (ii) Where a
worker after  dismissal is  sought to  be  reinstated  under
Industrial Law.	 and (iii)  Where a  statutory body  acts in
breach or  violation of the mandatory provisions of the Act.
[1020 E-G]
     Sirsi Municipality v. Kom Francis [1973] 3 S.C.R. 348..
Indian Airlines	 Corporation v.	 Sukhdeo  Rai  [1971]  Supp.
S.C.R. 510,  514. 3.  R. Tewari	 v. District Board, Agra and
Anr., [1964]  3 S.C.R.	55, 59,	 Executive Committee of U.P.
State Warehousing  Corporation Ltd.  v. Chandra Kiran Tyagi.
[1970] 2  S.C.R. 250,  265 and	Bank of	 Baroda v. Jewan Lal
Mehrotra [1970] 2 L.L.J. 54, 55, referred to.
     Since the	appellant  is  not  a  statutory  body,	 the
present case  does not	fall  within  any  of  the  excepted
categories  and	 the  respondent  is  not  entitled  to	 any
declaration or injunction. [1020 G-H]
     (b) Assuming  that	 the  Sirsi  Municipality  case	 has
extended the  scope of	the exceptions	to public  or  local
bodies even  if they  are non-statutory	 bodies so that, the
appellant though  a non-statutory  body, will still be bound
by the statutory
1008
provisions of  law, in	view of the special circumstances of
this ease, it will not be a proper exercise of discretion to
grant a	 decree for  declaration and injunction in favour of
the respondent The grant of specific relief is, under ss. 20
and 34 of the Specific Relief Act, 1963 as well as under the
Common Law,  purely discretionary  and can  be refused where
the ends of justice do not require the relief to be granted.
The exercise  of discretion  applies  as  much	to  a  Court
exercising writ jurisdiction as well as in suits. The relief
has to	be granted  by the  Court according  to sound  legal
principles  and	 ex  debito  justitiae.	 The  Court  has  to
administer justice  between the	 parties and  cannot convert
itself into  an instrument  of injustice  or  an  engine  of
oppression. The	 Court must  keep in  mind the	well-settled
principles of  justice and  fairplay and should exercise the
discretion only	 if the ends of justice require it. [1021 C-
D. 1022 A. 1023 H-1024 D, E-F; 1025 F]
     Jerome Francis v. Municipal Councillors of Kuala Lumpur
(1962) W.L.R.  1411. A.	 Francis v. Municipal Councillors of
Kuala Lumpur (1962) 3 All. E.R. 633, 637 and R.T. Rangachari
v. Secretary of State for India in Council, L.R. 64 I.A. 40,
53-54, applied.
     Mahant Indra Narain Das v. Mahant Ganga Ram & Anr., AIR
1965 All.  683, 684 and Bhairabendra Narayn Bhup v. State of
Assam, A.I.R. 1953 Assam 162, 165, referred to.
     Hill v.  C.A. Parsons  & Co.  Ltd. (1971)	3 All.	E.R.
1345, distinguished. ed.
     In the  present case, neither the first appellate Court
nor the	 High Court  while decreeing  the respondent's suit,
considered whether  it is a fit case in which the discretion
should be exercised in favour of the respondent. [1024 D-E]
     (i) The  respondent served the institution only for two
rears. If  relief as  prayed for is granted to him, he would
have to	 be paid  salary and  interest for  nine years which
would amount  to more  than a lakh of rupees, even though he
had not	 done any  work for  the college during those years.
and (ii)  though the respondent is not at fault, the payment
of such a large sum would undoubtedly work serious injustice
to the	appellant because  it is  likely to destroy the very
existence of the Institution. [1024 G-1025 B]
     Therefore,	 instead  of  granting	the  relief  to	 the
respondent as  prayed for,  it he is allowed to withdraw and
keep  the  sum	of  about  Rs.	21,000/-  deposited  by	 the
appellant by  virtue of	 interlocutory	orders	towards	 the
salary of  the respondent,  it will  vindicate his stand and
compensate him for any hardship caused to him by terminating
his services and will put a stamp of finality to any further
litigation between them [1025 C-F]
(Per Bhagwati, J.):
     This Court	 has laid  down three exceptions to the rule
under the  Common Law  that the	 Court will  not  ordinarily
force an employer to retain the services of an employee whom
he no  longer wishes  to employ: (1) In the case of a public
servant dismissed from service in contravention of Art. 311;
(2) Under  the Industrial Law. and (3) When a statutory body
has acted  in breach  of a mandatory obligation imposed by a
statute. [1030 B-C, F-G]
     Dr. S.B.  Dutta v. University of Delhi A.I.R. 1958 S.C.
1050. Life  Insurance Corporation  of India  v. Sunil  Kumar
Mukherjee A.I.R. 1961 S.C. 847. Mafatlal Barot v. Divisional
Controller, State  Transport, Mahsana A.I.R. 1966 S.C. 1364.
B.N. Tewari  v. District Board, Agra, A.I.R. 1964 S.C. 1680.
U.P. State  Warehousing Corporation  v. C.K.  Tyagi [1970] 2
S.C.R. 250.  Indian  Airlines  Corporation  v.	Sukhdeo	 Rai
[1971] Supp.  S.C.R. 510  and Bank  of Baroda  v. Jewan	 Lal
Mehrotra [1970] 2 L.L.J. 54. referred to.
     But, these	 3 exceptions formulated in the statement of
law laid  down by  this Court,	are not	 intended to  be and
cannot be  exhaustive. The  categories of  exceptions to the
general rule  should not  be closed, because, any attempt at
rigid and  exhaustive formulation of legal rules is bound to
stifle the  growth of  law and cripple its capacity to adapt
itself to  the changing	 needs of  society. In	fact, in the
Sirsi Municipality  v. Kom Francis [1973] 3 S.C.R. 348, this
Court
1009
pointed out  that the  third exception	applied not  only to
employees in  the service of "bodies created under statutes"
but also  to those  in the  employment of  "other public  or
local authorities.  This exception  is	really	intended  to
cover  cases   where  by   reason  of  breach  of  mandatory
obligation imposed  by law,  as distinct  from contract, the
termination of service is null and void so that there in law
no repudiation at all. [1031 C-F]
     Where the	relationship between  the employer  and	 his
employee is governed by statute or statutory regulations the
termination of	the service  of the employee may, in a given
situation, be null and void, and in that event, it would not
have the  effect of  putting an	 end to the contract and the
employee would be entitled to a declaration that his service
is continuing. What the employee would be claiming in such a
case is	 not enforcement of contract of personal service but
declaration of	statutory invalidity  of an  act done by the
employer. [1029 A-D]
     In the  present case,  it is  not necessary  to  decide
whether the  appellant is  or is  not statutory	 body  or  a
public authority  or whether  the Statutes of the University
had the	 force of law conferring rights on the respondent as
in the	case of	 P. R.	Jodh v.	 A. L. Pande [1965] 2 S.C.R.
713, or	 that they  only set  out the  terms and  conditions
which conferred	 no legal  rights unless and until they were
embodied  in  a	 contract  between  the	 appellant  and	 the
respondent, as	in the	case of	 V. R.	Mishra	v.  Managing
Committee, Shri	 Lal Narain  College [1972]  3 SCR 320, 326,
because, the  termination of  the respondent's	services was
ineffective and	 inoperative as	 it was	 not approved by the
Vice-Chancellor as  required  by  the  University  Act.	 The
language of  the section  of the  University Act is absolute
and peremptory	and provides  in unambiguous  terms that the
termination shall  be  ineffective  and	 inoperative  unless
approved by  the Vice-Chancellor;  and	this  rule  of	law,
enacted by the Legislature, operates irrespective of whether
the management is or is not a statutory body. When the Court
refuses to  recognise the  termination	as  valid,  it	only
enforces the  law and  there is no question of transgressing
the principle  that a contract of personal service cannot be
enforced. [1031F, 1032 D]
     Therefore, the  termination  of  the  services  of	 the
respondent by the appellant was ineffective and void and did
not operative  to put  an  end	to  the	 employment.  Hence,
ordinarily the	respondent, whose  termination of service is
thus null  and void  or ineffective by reason of a statutory
provision or  subordinate legislation which has the force of
law, should  be awarded	 a declaration that he continues; in
service and  the fact  that he	was in employment only for a
short period  of two  years should be no ground for refusing
him the declaration. [1032 D-F]
     But in  view of  the Peculiar  facts and  circumstances
this case,  and since  the grant  of tho  relief is  in	 the
discretion of  the Court, it must be held that this is not a
proper case  for the  grant of such relief. If the relief of
declaration and	 injunction is granted to the respondent, it
will involve  the appellant in a financial liability of mere
than  a	  lakh	of  rupees  and	 that  would  wipe  out	 the
educational institution	 of the	 appellant or  in any  event
seriously  cripple   it	 and   that,  in   its	turn,  would
prejudicially affect the interests of the student community.
That is	 an important  consideration which  the Court cannot
fail to	 take into  account in	exercising  its	 discretion.
Moreover,  the	 aggregate  amount  of	about  Rs.  21,000/-
deposited by the appellant in Court would be a fair and just
compensation to the respondent. [1032 F-G, H-1033 B]



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No 1 543 of 1974.

Appeal by special leave from the Judgment and order dated the 30th July, 1974 of the Allahabad High Court in Second Appeal No. 2973 of 1972.

S.V. Gupte, J. P. Goyal, P. C. Gupta and G. S. Chatterjee for the appellant.

M.K. Ramamurthi and O.P. Rana for Respondent No. 1. D.P. Mukherjee for Respondents 3-5.

The Judgment of H. R. Khanna and S. Murtaza Fazal Ali, JJ. was delivered by Fazal Ali, J., P. N. Bhagwati, J. gave a separate opinion.

FAZAL ALI, J.-This appeal by special leave is directed against the judgment of the Allahabad High Court affirming the decree of the First Additional Civil & Sessions Judge, Muzaffarnagar by which the plaintiff/respondent's suit for injunction was decreed.

The appeal arises in the following circumstances. The appellant which is the Executive Committee of Vaish Degree College in the District of Muzaffarnagar was registered under the Registration of Cooperative Societies Act as an institution for imparting education. The affairs of the College were managed by the Executive Committee of the Vaish College which is the appellant in this case. In the year the Vaish Degree College was affiliated to the Agra University and as a consequence thereof the College agreed to be governed by the provisions of the Agra University Act and the statutes and ordinances made thereunder. With the establishment of the Meerut University some time in the year 1965 the Vaish Degree College got affiliated to the Meerut University. The plaintiff/respondent was appointed as Principal of the College on permanent basis with effect from July 1, 1964 and his appointment as Principal was formally approved by the Vice-Chancellor of the Agra University. Two years later it appears that differences arose between the Executive Committee of the College and the plaintiff/respondent resulting in allegations and counter allegations and culminating in a notice served by the Executive Committee on October 24, 1966 on the plaintiff/respondent directing him not to discharge the duties of the Principal and another letter was sent to defendant No. 4 a member of the staff of the College to officiate as Principal in place of the plaintiff/respondent. This was fol lowed up by a counter-notice by the plaintiff/respondent to the Executive Committee that the notice sent to him was illegal and the respondent also asked defendant No. 4 not to assume charge of the Principal. On March 12, 1967, the Executive Committee by a resolution terminated the services of the plaintiff/respondent with effect from October 24, 1966 and this resolution was amended by another resolution on March 29, 1967. Even before the formal resolution terminating the services of the plaintiff/respondent was passed it appears that the plain tiff had filed the present suit on October 28, 1966 before the Court of the First Additional Civil & Sessions Judge, Muzaffarnagar which was transferred for disposal to the Court of the Munsif, Kairana.

The plaintiff's case was that on being affiliated to the Agra University and thereafter to the Meerut University and adopting the provisions of the Acts and the statutes of the said Universities the appellant College became a statutory body and had no jurisdiction to terminate the services of the plaintiff/respondent without seeking the previous approval of the Vice-Chancellor. The plaintiff further submitted that after his appointment he entered into an agreement with the Executive Committee in accordance with the statutes of the University and 1 appellant was bound by the terms and provisions of the statutes under which his services could not be terminated without the previous approval of the Vice-Chancellor. The plaintiff therefore contended that his removal from service was without jurisdiction and he must be deemed to have continued in service. He also made some allegations of bias and mala fides against the Executive Committee and some other persons with which we are not concerned in this appeal. The plaintiff accordingly prayed for an injunction restraining the defendants from interfering with his duties as the Principal of the College. It appears, however, from the record that after the notice given to the plaintiff / respondent by the Executive Committee the plaintiff was bereft of all his powers and in spite of his attempts to get into the College and work as Principal he was not allowed to do so which led to some criminal proceedings also. It is, therefore, clear that at least after the resolution of the Executive Committee was passed termination the services of the plaintiff he has not been working as Principal of the College uptil now. This position is not disputed before us by counsel for the parties.

The defence was that the Executive Committee was not a statutory body and therefore was not bound by the statutes and the provisions of the University Acts although as a matter of convention it had agreed to follow the same. The defendant/appellant also denied the allegations of the plaintiff/respondent that the Executive Committee had entered into any agreement or contract of service with the plaintiff/respondent. The defendant further alleged that as the plaintiff/respondent remained habitually and perpetually absent from his duties without the permission of the concerned authority the defendant/appellant was compelled to dispense with the services of the plaintiff/respondent. In fact the plea taken by the defendant was that the plaintiff himself by his remaining perpetually absent from duties abandoned the service and had put an end to the contract of service and therefore he could not be heard to say that the contract of service still subsisted.

The Trial Court of Munsif, Kairana, framed a number of issues and after considering the evidence and the circumstances, found-(i) that the plaintiff had failed to prove that he ever executed any agreement with the defendant/appellant; and (ii) that the defendant/appellant was not a statutory body and therefore was not bound by the provisions of the University Acts or the statutes made thereunder. The learned Munsif therefore found that a case for declaration or injunction had not been made out and he accordingly dismissed the suit of the plaintiff.

The plaintiff/respondent went up in appeal against the judgment and decree of the Munsif and the appeal was heard by the First Additional Civil & Sessions Judge, Muzaffarnagar, who by his order dated December 3, 1971, reversed the decision of the Munsif and decreed the plaintiff's suit and granted the injunction prayed for. lt may be noticed that so far as the plea of the plaintiff/respondent that be had executed an agreement with the Executive Committee of the College which formed the basis of the terms of his contract of service was concerned the learned Additional Civil & Sessions Judge also affirmed the finding of the Munsif on this point and held that there was no such agreement. Even before us this finding was not disputed by the learned counsel for the plaintiff/respondent who has proceeded on the assumption that there was no agreement executed between the plain tiff and the defendant as alleged by the plaintiff.

The defendant/appellant filed a second appeal hl the High Court of Allahabad against the decision of the First Additional Civil & Sessions Judge decreeing the plaintiff's suit. The matter was heard by a single Judge who, however, referred the case to a Full Bench framing the following issue:

"Can the Civil Court grant the relief of injunction in view of the facts and circumstances of the present case ?"
Consequently the matter was placed before the Full Bench of the Allahabad High Court which after hearing the arguments decided the following points in favour of the plaintiff/respondent:

(1) That the defendant/appellant being a statutory body was bound by the provisions of the University Acts and the statutes made thereunder and therefore the termination of the services of the plaintiff/respondent without obtaining the sanction of the Vice- Chancellor was illegal & invalid; and (2) That in the facts and circumstances of the case, the plaintiff/respondent was entitled to the injunction as prayed for.
The case then came back before the Single Judge who in view of the decision of the Full Bench affirmed the decree of the First Additional Civil & Sessions Judge decreeing the plaintiff's suit with the modification that the suit was decreed only against defendants 2, 4, 6 & 7 but dismissed as against defendants 1 & 5. Hence this appeal by special leave before us.

Mr. Gupte learned counsel for the appellant submitted before us that it was not necessary to go into the complicated facts of the case, because he adumbrated three propositions of law before us which in his opinion were sufficient to decide the case. In the first place it was contended that the finding of the Full Bench which formed the basis of the judgment of the High Court appealed against that the defendant/appellant was a statutory body was legally erroneous; secondly the counsel submitted that even if the appellant was a statutory body as no agreement was executed between the respondent and the appellant the statutes passed by the University would not apply and the termination of the services of the respondent would be governed by the usual master and servant relationship; and thirdly, it was contended that it is well settled that the courts do not enforce a contract of personal service in the absence of special circumstances as laid by several decisions of this Court, and the case in hand does not fall within any of the exceptions laid down by this Court.

Mr. Ramamurthi learned counsel for the respondent rebutted the arguments of Mr. Gupte and supported the judgment of the Full Bench of the Allahabad High Court that the appellant was a statutory body and therefore the termination of the services of the respondent was legally invalid. It was further contended that in view of the decision of this Court in Sirsi Municipality v. Kom Francis the scope of the exception laid down by this Court in various cases has been extended even to include within its fold non-statutory bodies provided they are public or local bodies which the appellant/defendant was undoubtedly one. Lastly it was submitted that once it is established that the termination of the services of the respondent was legally invalid inasmuch as the sanction of the Vice-Chancellor was not obtained, the declaration that the plaintiff/respondent continued in service and injunction prayed for must be granted as a matter of law. In the course of the arguments, however, the learned counsel for the appellant also suggested that the relief of injunction or declaration being an equitable relief and in the discretion of this Court this was not a fit case in which this discretion should be exercised in favour of the plaintiff/respondent.

We would first deal with the important question, which has been the sheet-anchor of the arguments of the learned counsel for the respondent as also the main basis of the judgment of the Full Bench of the Allahabad High Court, as to whether or not the appellant Executive Committee can be said to be a statutory body in the circumstances of the present case. It seems to us that before an institution can be a statutory body it must be created by or under the statute and owe its existence to a statute. This must be the primary thing which has got to be established. Here a distinction must be made between an institution which is not created by or under a statute but is governed by certain statutory provisions for the proper maintenance and administration of the institution. There have been a number of institutions which though not created by or under any statute have adopted certain statutory provisions, but that by itself is not, in our opinion, sufficient to clothe the institution with a statutory character. In Sukhdev Singh & Ors. v. Bhagatram Sardar Singh Raghuvanshi & Others this Court clearly pointed out as to what constitutes a statutory body. In this connection my Lord A. N. Ray, C.J., observed as follows:

"A company incorporated under the Companies Act is not created by the Companies Act but comes into existence in accordance with the provisions of the Act. It is not a statutory body because it is not created by the statute. It is a body created in accordance with the provisions of the statute."
It is, therefore, clear that there is a well marked distinction between a body which is created by the statute and a body which after having come into existence is governed in accordance with the provisions of the statute. In other words the position seems to be that the institution concerned must owe its very existence to a statute which would be the fountain-head of its powers. The question in such cases to be asked is, if there is no statute would the institution have any legal existence. If the answer is in the negative, then undoubtedly it is a statutory body, but if the institution has a separate existence of its own without any reference to the statute concerned but is merely governed by the statutory provisions it cannot be said to be a statutory body. The High Court, in our opinion, was in error in holding that merely because the Executive Committee followed certain statutory provisions of the University Act or the statutes made thereunder it must be deemed to be a statutory body. In fact the Full Bench of the High Court relied on three circumstances in order to hold that the Executive Committee was a statutory body, viz., (i) that it was affiliated to the Agra University which was established by the statute; (ii) that there were certain mandatory provisions in the Agra University Act which were binding on the Executive Committee; and (iii) that the Executive Committee was governed by the statutes framed by the Agra University. In our opinion, none of these factors would be sufficient to alter the character and nature of the Executive Committee and convert it into a full fledged statutory body. To begin with the Executive Committee had an independent status having been registered under the Registration of Co-operative Societies Act and was a self- governed or an autonomous body. It was affiliated to the Agra University merely for the sake of convenience and mainly for the purpose that the courses of studies prevalent in the College may be recognised by the University.

Statute 11-A of the Agra University Hand-Book (1965-66) runs thus:

"Each College already affiliated or when affiliated, which is not maintained exclusively by Government must be under the Management of a regularly constituted Governing body (which term includes Managing Committee) on which the staff of the college shall be represented by the Principal of the college and at least one representative of the teachers of the college to be appointed by rotation in order of seniority determined by length of service in the college, who shall hold office for one academic year."
All that the statute of the Agra University required was that the Managing Committee of the College must co-opt the Principal of the College and one representative of the teachers of the college by rotation as members of the Committee. It is manifest that by co-opting these members the Managing Committee did not lose its independent status but continued to remain a non-statutory and autonomous body. Similarly the mere fact that the statutes of the University were adopted by the Managing Committee and it was as a matter of convention bound to follow the statutory provisions of the Act would not clothe the Managing Committee with a statutory status or character. In fact the adoption of the statutes was agreed to by the appellant Executive Committee for the better governance, administration and extension of the educational activities of the institution. In fact an identical argument which forms the basis of the judgment of the Full Bench of the High Court had been advanced before this Court and rejected outright. For instance in Sabhajit Tewary v. Union of India & ors the question was whether the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research which was a society registered under the Societies Registration Act, as the present appellant is, was a statutory body. It was urged that because the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research had government nominees as the President of the body and derived guidance and financial aid from the Government, it was a statutory body A. N. Ray, C.J., rebutted these arguments and observed as follows:

"The Society does not have a statutory character like the Oil and Natural Gas Commission, or the Life Insurance Corporation or Industrial Finance Corporation. It is a society incorporated in accordance with the provisions of the Societies Registration Act. The fact that the Prime Minister is the President or that the Government appoints nominees to the Governing Body or that the Government may terminate the membership will not establish anything more than the fact that the Government takes special care that the promotion, guidance and co-operation of scientific and industrial research, the institution and financing of specific researched establishment or development and assistance to special institutions or departments of the existing institutions for scientific study of problems affecting particular industry in a trade, the utilisation of the result of the researches conducted under the auspices of the Council towards the development of industries in the country are carried out in a responsible manner.
Similar view was taken by this Court in Kumari Regina v. St. Aloysius Higher Elementary School & Anr. where this Court observed as follows:
"But it cannot also be gainsaid that as the Government has the power, to admit schools to recognition and grants in-aid, it can, de hors the Act, lay down conditions under which it would grant recognition and aid. To achieve uniformity and certainty in the exercise of such executive power and to avoid discrimination, the Government would have to frame rules which, however, would be in the form of administrative instructions to its officers, dealing with the matters of recognition and aid. If such rules were to lay down conditions, the Government can insist that satisfaction of such conditions would be condition precedent to obtaining recognition and aid and that a breach or non-compliance of such conditions would entail either the denial or withdrawal of recognition and aid. The Management of a school, therefore, would commit a breach or non-compliance of the conditions laid down in the rules on pain of deprivation of recognition and aid. The rules thus govern the terms on which the Government would grant recognition and aid and the Government can enforce these rules upon the management. But the enforcement of such rules is a matter between the Government and the management, and a third party, Hr such as a teacher aggrieved by some order of the manage-
ment, cannot derive from the rules any enforceable right against the management on the ground of a breach or non compliance of any of the rules."
This is a case which is almost on all fours with the facts of the present case because there the case was whether the school after being recognised by the Government for the purpose of grant was bound to observe the rules.

In Indian Airlines Corporation v. Sukhdeo Rai, it was observed as follows:

"The fact, therefore, that the appellant- Corporation was one set up under and was regulated by Act XXVII of 1953 would not take away, without anything more, the relation ship between it and its employees from the category of purely master and servant relationship."
The Full Bench of the Allahabad High Court, however, appears to have placed great reliance on the decisions of this Court in Prabhakar Ramakrishna Jodh v. A.L. Pande & Anr. where this Court held that the Governing Body of the College in that case was a statutory body. In this connection, this Court observed as follows:

"On the other hand, we are of opinion that the provisions of Clause 8 of the ordinance relating to security of the tenure of teachers are part and parcel of the teachers' service conditions and, as we have already pointed out, the provisions of the 'College Code' in this regard are validly made by the University in exercise of the statutory power and have, therefore, the force and effect of law. It follows, therefore, that the 'College Code' creates legal rights in favour of teachers of affiliated colleges and the view taken by the High Court is erroneous."
This case, however, is clearly distinguishable from the facts of the present case. To begin with, in P.R. Jodh's case, this Court was dealing with the College Code which was itself a creature of the statute, namely, the University of Saugar Act. Under ordinance No. 20 Para 1 the Governing body was created by an ordinance passed under the University of Saugar Act. It is, therefore, clear that the statutes are the creature of the Act. Thus the distinction is that in P.R. Jodh's case the Governing Body was the Council of Management established under the Act while here the Managing Committee is not. It is obvious that the Governing Body was created under a statutory provision because the ordinance had undoubtedly a statutory force having been passed under the Act. Para 2(i) (c) of the College Code runs thus:

"2. (i) In this ordinance, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context:-
(c) 'Governing Body' means the Council of Management established under this ordinance for the control and general management of the 'College'."
The Governing Body was, therefore, established under the ordinance itself and had no independent existence at all. Similarly under Para 3 of the ordinance the constitution of the Governing Body was laid down. It is, therefore, clear that not only was the Governing Body of the College established under the ordinance but even the constitution of the said Governing Body was laid down by the ordinance itself and the functions of the Governing Body were clearly defined by Para 4 of ,, ordinance No. 20. The ordinance itself was called the "College Code" which came into legal existence by virtue of the ordinance. In other words, the position is that before ordinance No. 20 was passed under the University Act, the Governing Body had no existence at all. The same, however, could not be said of the present Managing Committee which had its independent existence long before it was affiliated to the Agra University and had also its own constitution, the only exception being that two members had to be taken ex-officio in the Managing Committee. There is, therefore, world of difference between the nature and manner of the establishment of the Governing Body under the University of Saugar Act and the Managing Committee in the instant case. Further more, this case was noticed and discussed by a later judgment of this Court in Vidya Ram Mishra v. Managing Committee, Shri Jai Narain College and was distinguished. Speaking for the Court, Mathew, J., observed as follows:

"When once this Court came to the conclusion that the 'College Code' had the force of law and conferred rights on the teachers of affiliated colleges, the right to challenge the order terminating the services of the appellant, passed in violation of clause 8(vi)
(a) of the 'College Code' in a proceeding under Article 226 followed 'as the night the day` and the fact that the appellant had entered into a contract was considered as immaterial.
* * * * On a plain reading of statute 151, it is clear that only provides that the terms and conditions mentioned therein must be incorporated in the contract to be entered into between the college and the teacher concerned. It does not say that the terms and conditions have any legal force, until and unless they are embodied in an agreement. To put it in other words, the terms and conditions of service mentioned in Statute 151 have proprio vigore no force of law. They become terms and conditions of service only by virtue of their being incorporated in the contract. Without the con- tract, they have no vitality and can Confer no legal rights.
Whereas in the case of Prabhakar Ramakrishna Jodh v. A. L. Pande and another-[(1965) 2 S.C.R. 713], the terms and conditions of service embodied in clause 8(vi) (a) of the 'College Code' had the force of law apart from the contract and conferred rights on the appellant there, here the terms and conditions mentioned in Statute 151 have no efficacy, unless they are incorporated in a contract."

It is, therefore, clear that in P. R. Jodh's case the College Code was by itself a statutory Code so that the provisions of the statute operated proprio vigore and did not depend on the execution of the agreement between the employer and the employee in accordance with the statutes of the University. In the instant case, which is very much like the case in Vidya Ram Mishra (supra) the statute merely enjoined that the agreement between the employer and the employee should be incorporated according to the form and conditions prescribed by the statute and until the said agreement is executed the provisions of the Statute would not apply proprio vigore. The Allahabad High Court no doubt tried to distinguish Vidya Ram Mishra's case, but with due respect, we might observe that the distinction drawn by the High Court is a distinction without any difference. The High Court has not considered the two basic facts which were present in P.R. Jodh's case but which were not present in the instant case, viz., (1) that the governing body in the case dealt with by this Court in P. R. Jodh's case was in itself a creature of the statute; and (2) that in the instant case the statute did not apply proprio vigore but only after an agreement was executed between the employer and the employee in accordance with the terms and conditions of the statute. The High Court also failed to consider that there was a concurrent finding of fact by all the Courts below that the plaintiff/respondent never executed any agreement with the Executive Committee of the College in the form prescribed by the statutes of the Agra University Act.

Thus in view of the decisions of this Court regarding the circumstances under which the institution can be treated as a statutory body we are unable to agree with the view taken by the Allahabad High Court that the Executive Committee was a statutory body merely be cause it was affiliated to the University or was regulated by the provisions of the University Act or the statutes made thereunder. We accordingly hold that the decision of the Full Bench of the Allahabad High Court on this point is legally erroneous and must be overruled.

This brings us to the next point for consideration as to whether or not the plaintiff/respondent's case fell within the exceptions laid down by this Court to the general rule that the contract of personal service is not specifically enforceable. In this connection as early as 1964, in S.R. Tewari v. District Board, Agra and Anr., this Court observed as follows:

"Under the common law the Court will not ordinarily force an employer to retain the services of an employee whom he no longer wishes to employ. But this rule is subject to certain well recognized exceptions. It is open to the Courts in an appropriate case to declare that a public servant who is dismissed from service in contravention of Art. 311 continues to remain in service, even though by so doing the State is in effect forced to continue to employ the servant whom it does not desire to employ. Similarly under the industrial law jurisdiction of the labour and industrial, tribunals to compel the employer to employ a worker, whom he does not desire to employ, is recognised. The Courts are also invested with the power to declare invalid the act of a statutory body, if by doing the act the body has acted in breach of a mandatory obligation imposed by statute, even if by making the declaration the body is compelled to do something which it does not desire to do."
To the same effect is the decision of this Court in Executive Committee of U.P. State Warehousing Corporation Ltd. v. Chandra Kiran Tyagi, where it was observed as follows:

"From the two decisions of this Court, referred to above, the position in law is that no declaration to enforce a con tract of personal service will be normally granted. But there are certain well-recognized exceptions to this rule and they are: To grant such a declaration in appropriate cases regarding (1) A public servant, who has been dismissed from service in contravention of Art. 311. (2) Reinstatement of a dismissed worker under Industrial Law by Labour or Industrial Tribunals. (3) A statutory body when it has acted in breach of a mandatory obligation, imposed by statute;"
In Indian Airlines Corporation v. Sukhdeo Rai (supra) this Court also observed as follows:

"It is a well settled principle that when there is a purported termination of a contract of service, a declaration, that the contract of service still subsisted, would not be made in the absence of special circumstances because of the principle that courts do not ordinarily grant specific performance of service. This is so, even in cases where the authority appointing an employee was acting in exercise of statutory authority. The relationship between the person appointed and the employer would in such cases be contractual, i.e. as between a master and servant, and the termination of that relationship would not entitle the servant to a declaration that his employment had not been validly determined."
To the same effect is the decision of this Court in Bank of Baroda v Jewan Lal Mehrotra where this Court observed as follows:

"The law as settled by this Court is that no declaration r to enforce a contract of personal service will be normally granted. The well recognised exceptions to this rule are (1) where a public servant has been dismissed from service in contravention of Art. 311; (2) where reinstatement is sought of a dismissed worker under the industrial law by labour or industrial tribunals; (3) where a statutory body has acted in breach of a mandatory obligation imposed by statute;"
In the Sirsi Municipality's case the matter was exhaustively reviewed and Ray, J., (as he then was) observed as follows:

"The cases of dismissal a servant fall under three broad heads, purely by contract of employment. Any breach of contract in such a case is enforced by a suit for wrongful dismissal and damages. Just as a contract of employment is not capable of specific performance similarly breach of contract of employment is not capable of founding a declaratory judgment of subsistence of employment. A declaration of unlawful termination and restoration to service in such a case of contract of employment would be indirectly an instance of specific performance of contract for personal service. Such a declaration is not permissible under the Law of Specific Relief Act.
The second type of cases of master and servant arises under Industrial Law. Under that branch of law a servant who is wrongfully dismissed may be reinstated. This is a special provision under Industrial Law. This relief is a departure from the reliefs available under the Indian Contract Act and the Specific Relief Act which do not provide for reinstatement of a servant. The third category of cases of master and servant arises in regard to the servant in the employment of the State or of other public or local authorities or bodies created under statute."
On a consideration of the authorities mentioned above, it is, there fore, clear that a contract of personal service cannot ordinarily be specifically enforced and a Court normally would not give a declaration that the contract subsists and the employee, even after having been removed from service can be deemed to be in service against the will and consent of the employer. This rule, however, is subject to three well recognised exceptions-(i) where a public servant is sought to be removed from service in contravention of the provisions of Art. 311 of the Constitution of India; (ii) where a worker is sought to be reinstated on being dismissed under the Industrial Law, and

(iii) where a statutory body acts in breach or violation of the mandatory provisions of the statute.

In view of our finding that the Executive Committee of the College in the instant case was not a statutory body, the present case does not fall within any of the excepted categories mentioned above, and hence prima facie, the plaintiff/respondent is not entitled to any declaration or injunction. The learned counsel for the respondent, however, placed great reliance on the decision of this Court in Municipality's case (supra) in order to contend that this decision had included within the fold of its exceptions a fourth category, namely, an institution which even though was a non-statutory body, but was a local or a public authority. Reliance was placed particularly on the following observations of Ray, J., as he then was, in that case:

"The third category of cases of master and servant arises in regard to the servant in the employment of the State or of other public or local authorities or bodies created under statute.
In the case of servant of the State or of local authorities or statutory bodies, courts have declared in appropriate cases the dismissal to be invalid if the dismissal is contrary to rules of natural justice or if the dismissal is in violation of the provisions of the statute."
Assuming for the sake of arguments, but not deciding that this decision has extended the scope of the exceptions, so that the appellant Executive Committee though a non- statutory body will still be bound by the statutory provisions of law, let us see what is the position. It would appear that under s. 25-C (2) of the Agra University Act corresponding to similar provisions in Kanpur and Meerut Universities Act of 1965 which runs thus:

"Every decision by the Management of an affiliated college, other than a college maintained by Government, to dismiss or remove from service a teacher shall be reported forthwith to the Vice-Chancellor and subject to provisions to be made by the Statutes shall not take effect until it has been approved by the Vice- Chancellor."
it was incumbent on the Executive Committee of the College to have taken the previous approval of the Vice-Chancellor before terminating the services of the plaintiff/respondent. Reliance was placed by the learned counsel for the respondent on the words "shall not take effect until it has been approved by the Vice-Chancellor". It was urged that there has been an infraction of a mandatory provision of the Act itself which is undoubtedly binding on the appellant Executive Committee and the resolution of the Executive Committee terminating the services of the respondent is not only invalid but completely without jurisdiction, and, therefore, the plaintiff/respondent is entitled to the injunction sought for. It is common ground that the procedure enjoined in sub-s. (2) of s. 25-C of the Agra University Act was not at all followed by the Executive Committee and there can be no doubt that the Executive Committee has been guilty of this default. The question remains whether even if there has been a violation of the mandatory provisions of the statute, should we in the exercise of our discretion grant a declaration or an injunction to the plaintiff/respondent in the peculiar facts and circumstances of the present case ? It is well settled that a relief under the Specific Relief Act is purely discretionary and can be refused where the ends of justice do not require the relief to be granted. Mr. Ramamurthi learned counsel for the plaintiff/respondent submitted that the question of discretion would arise only in case where the High Court or this Court is acting in a writ jurisdiction and not in a suit. We are, however, unable to agree with this argument because the exercise of discretion is spelt out from the provisions of the Specific Relief Act and the common law and it applies as much to the writ jurisdiction as to other action at law.

In Jerome Francis v. Municipal Councillors of Kuala Lampur(1), Lord Morris observed as follows:

"In their Lordships' view when there has been a purported termination of a contract of service a declaration to the effect that the contract of service still subsists will rarely be made. This is a consequence of the general principle of law that the courts will not grant specific performance of contracts of service. Special circumstances will be required before such a declaration is made and its making will normally be in the discretion of the Court. In their Lordships' view there are no circumstances in the present case which would make it either just or proper to make such a declaration."
Further more under similar circumstances though the dismissal of the employee was by an authority which was not competent to dismiss him, namely, the Municipal Council, their Lordships of the Privy Council refused to grant the declaration in view of the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case which caused hardship. The Privy Council in A. Francis v. Municipal Councillors of Kuala Lampur(1) observed as follows:

"Accepting, however, the decision of the Court of Appeal, which, as has been pointed out, has not been the subject of any cross-appeal, the position on Oct. 1 was that the removal of the appellant was a removal by the council and not by the president. The council were his employers, but having regard to the provisions of the ordinance their termination of his service constituted wrongful dismissal. Their Lordships consider that it is beyond doubt that on Oct. 1, 1957, there was de facto a dismissal of the appellant by his employers, the respondents. On that date he was excluded from the council's premises. Since then he has not done any work for the council. In all these circumstances it seems to their Lordships that the appellant must be treated as having been wrongly dismissed on Oct. 1, 1957, and that his remedy lies in a claim for damages. It would be wholly unreal to accede to the contention that since Oct. 1, 1957, he had continued to be and that he still continues to be in the employment of the respondents."
As against this position Mr. Ramamurthi counsel for the plaintiff/ respondent submitted that in Hill v. C. A. Parsons & Co. Ltd. (3) a declaration that the termination was invalid was granted by the Court. In that case, however, it was pointed out that the declaration was granted under very special circumstances of that case where the employee was said to be removed from service almost at the fag end of his career after serving for 35 years when he was due to retire only two years later. In that case, however, Lord Denning laid down that in the absence of any special circumstances, a declaration should not be granted. It is clear that in the instant case the respondent had worked in the College for only two years. In these circumstances, therefore, this case does not appear to be of any assistance to the respondent.

In R. T. Rangachari v. Secretary of State for India in Council(1) the Privy Council observed as follows:

"But, although their Lordships differ in this important matter from the reasoning and conclusions of the Courts below, they are not on the whole prepared to direct that a declaration on this point should be made. The questions of fact and law are now decided, and a declaration could have no greater effect than the decision itself. After this lapse of time, and having regard to his health, no one suggests that the appellant can now be restored to his office, and the matter of pension and the responsibility of doing right in that regard rests with the Government. Accordingly, their Lordships agree in the view of the Courts below that no order or declaration should be made in this action."
A Division Bench of the Allahabad High Court in Mahant Indra Narain Das v. Mahant Ganga Ram Das & Anr.(2) observed as follows:

"The second thing to be noted is that the court is given a discretion to make the declaration sought and the plaintiff need not ask for any further relief. The relief being discretionary, no person can claim the declaration as of right."
Similarly in Bhairabendra Narayan Bhup v. State of Assam (3), a Division Bench of the Assam High Court observed as follows:

"It must be remembered that the declaration claimed under s. 42 lies entirely within the judicial discretion of the Court and is to be exercised with caution according to the exigencies of a particular case. A party cannot, as of right claim such a declaration, because such a relief is more in the nature of an equitable relief than a legal remedy. It has been repeatedly held that a Court should be circumspect as to the declaration it makes, and futile declarations should be always avoided."
Apart from these decisions it would appear that s. 20(1) of the Specific Relief Act clearly codifies this principle and may be extracted as follows:

"20. (1) The jurisdiction to decree specific performance is discretionary, and the court is not bound to grant such relief merely because it is lawful to do so; but the discretion of the court is not arbitrary but sound and reasonable, guided by judicial principles and capable of correction by a court of appeal."
Similarly s. 34 of the Specific Relief Act also gives a discretion to the Court to give a declaration of the legal character. Section 34 runs thus:

"Any person entitled to any legal character, or to any right as to any property, may institute a suit against any person denying, or interested to deny, his title to such character or right, and the court may in its discretion make therein a declaration that he is so entitled, and the plaintiff need not in such suit ask for any further relief:
Provided that no court shall make any such declaration where the plaintiff, being able to seek further relief than a mere declaration of title, omits to do so.
Explanation.-A trustee of property is a "person interested to deny" a title adverse to the title of someone who is not in existence, and for whom, if in existence, he would be a trustee."
It seems to us that neither the First Additional Civil & Sessions Judge nor the High Court, while decreeing the plaintiff's suit, considered this aspect of the matter whether this was a fit case in which the discretion should have been exercised in favour of the respondent. It is manifestly clear from the authorities discussed above that the relief of declaration and injunction under the provisions of the Specific Relief Act is purely discretionary and the plaintiff cannot claim it as of right. The relief has to be granted by the Court according to sound legal principles and ex debito justitiae. The Court has to administer justice between the parties and cannot convert itself into an instrument of injustice or an engine of oppression. In these circumstances, while exercising its discretionary powers the Court must keep in mind the well settled principles of justice and fairplay and should exercise the discretion only if the ends of justice require it, for justice is not an object which can be administered in vacuum.

The admitted facts in the present case, which will put the Court on its guard, while exercising its discretion to grant a declaration or injunction are as follows:

(1) That the plaintiff/respondent served the institution for a short period of two years only i.e. from 1964 to 1966 and thereafter he was bereft of all his powers and did not work in the College for a single day.
(2) That if the declaration sought for or the injunction is granted to the plaintiff/respondent the result would be that he would have to be paid his full salary with interest and provident fund for full nine years i.e. from 1966 to 1975, even though he had not worked in the institution for a single day during this period.
(3) That consequent upon the declaration the appellant would have to pay a very huge amount running into a lakh of rupees or perhaps more as a result of which the appellant and the institution would perhaps be completely wiped out and this would undoubtedly work serious injustice to the appellant because it is likely to destroy its very existence.
(4) It is true that the plaintiff/respondent is not at fault, but the stark realities, hard facts and extreme hardship of the case speak for themselves.
(5) It appears that by virtue of the interlocutory orders passed by this Court, the appellant has already deposited Rs.
9,000/- before the High Court which was to be withdrawn by the respondent after giving security, and a further sum of Rs. 9,100/-

being the salary of 13 months has also been deposited by the appellant before the Trial Court under the orders of this Court. It is also stated by counsel for the appellant that the appellant has deposited Rs. 3,000/- more. We feel that in the circumstances the respondent may be permitted to keep these amounts with him and he will not be required to refund the same to the appellant. The amount of deposit in the High Court, if not withdrawn by the respondent may now be withdrawn by him without any security and if he has already withdrawn the amount he will be discharged from the security. This will vindicate the stand of the respondent and compensate him for any hardship that may have been caused to him by the order terminating his services, and will also put a stamp of finality to any further litigation between the parties.

In view of these special and peculiar circumstances of this case, we feel that it will not be a proper exercise of discretion to grant a decree for declaration and injunction in favour of the respondent.

The appeal is accordingly allowed. We set aside the order passed by the High Court and the First Additional Civil & Sessions Judge, dismiss the plaintiff's suit and restore the judgment of the Trial Court. In the circumstances of the case the parties will bear their own costs throughout.

BHAGWATI, J. I agree with the final order proposed by my learned brother Fazal Ali, J., but I would like to state my own reasons for reaching that conclusion. The facts giving rise to the appeal have been fully set out in the judgment of my learned brother and it would be a futile exercise to restate them. I will straight away proceed to consider the question of law which arises for determination in the appeal. The question is, whether the termination of the service of the first respondent by the appellant was in violation of Statute 30 of the Statutes of the Agra University which applied to the appellant at the material time, and in any event, the termination was ineffective and inoperative as it was not approved by the Vice-Chancellor as required by s. 28, sub-s. (3) of the Kanpur and Meerut Universities Act, 1956, and in either case, whether the first respondent was entitled to a declaration that the termination was null and void so as to warrant a declaration that he continued in the service of the appellant, or, his claim merely lay in damages. It is a question of some importance.

I will first take up the first part of the question. On this part, there was no dispute between the parties that the requirements of Statute 30 were not complied with by the appellant in terminating the service of the first respondent. The controversy merely centered round the question whether the termination of service in breach of the requirements of Statute 30 rendered the termination null and void so as to entitle the first respondent to a declaration that he continues in service or it amounted merely to a breach of contract giving rise to a claim for damages. Let me first examine this question on principle before turning to the decided cases. There are two distinct classes of cases which might arise when we are considering the relationship between employer and employee. The relationship may be governed by contract or it may be governed by statute or statutory regulations. When it is governed by contract, the question arises whether the general principles of the Law of Contract are applicable to the contract of employment or the law governing the contract of employment is a separate and sui generis body of rules. The crucial question then is as to what is the effect of repudiation of the contract of employment by the employer. If an employer repudiates the contract of employment by dismissing his employee, can the employee refuse to accept the dismissal as terminating the contract and seek to treat the contract as still subsisting ? The answer to this question given by general contract principles would seem to be that the repudiation is of no effect unless accepted, in other words, the contracting party faced with a wrongful repudiation may opt to refuse to accept the repudiation and may hold the repudiator to a continuance of his contractual obligation. But does this rule apply to wrongful repudiation of the contract of employment ? The trend of the decisions seems to be that it does not. It seems to be generally recognized that wrongful repudiation of the contract of employment by the employer effectively terminates the employment: the termination being wrongful, entitles the employee to claim damages, but the employee cannot refuse to accept the repudiation and seek to treat the contract of employment as continuing. What is the principle behind this departure from the general rule of law of contract ? The reason seems to be that a contract of employment is not ordinarily one which is specifically enforced. If it cannot be specifically enforced, it would be futile to contend that the unaccepted repudiation is of no effect and the contract continues to subsist between the parties. The law in such a case, therefore, adopts a more realistic posture and holds that the repudiation effectively terminates the contract and the employee can only claim damages for wrongful breach of the contract. Now a contract of employment is not specifically enforced because ordinarily it is a contract of personal service and, as pointed out in the first illustration to clause (b) of s. 21 of the Specific Relief Act, 1877, a contract of personal service cannot be specifically enforced. Of course this illustration has now been omitted in the new Specific Relief Act, 1963 and what would be the effect of such omission may be a point which may require consideration some day by this Court. But for the purpose of this case, I will proceed on the assumption that even under the new Act, the law is the same and it frowns on specific enforcement of a contract of personal service. Now what is the rationale behind this principle ? That is found stated in the locus classicus of Fry, L.J., in De Francesco v. Barnum(1):

"For my own part, I should be very unwilling to extend decisions the effect of which is to compel persons who are not desirous of maintaining continuous personal relations with one another to continue those personal relations. I have a strong impression and a strong feeling that it is not in the interest of making that the rule of specific performance should be extended to such cases. I think the Courts are bound to be jealous, lest they should turn contracts of service into contracts of slavery; and therefore, speaking for myself, I should lean against the extension of the doctrine of specific performance and injunction in such a manner."
This rationale obviously can have application only where the contract of employment is a contract of personal service involving personal relations. It can have little relevance to conditions of employment in modern large-scale industry and enterprise or statutory bodies or public authorities where there is professional management of impersonal nature. It is difficult to regard the contract of employment in such cases as a contract of personal service save in exceptional cases. There is no reason why specific performance should be refused in cases of this kind where the contract of employment does not involve relationship of personal character. It must be noted that all these doctrines of contract of service as personal, non-assignable, unenforceable, and so on, grew up in an age when the contract of service was still frequently a "personal relation" between the owner of a small workshop or trade or business and his servant. The conditions have now vastly changed and these doctrines have to be adjusted and reformulated in order to suit needs of a changing society. We cannot doggedly hold fast to these doctrines which correspond to the social realities of an earlier generation far removed from ours. We must rid the law of these anachronistic doctrines and bring it in accord "with the felt necessities of the times". It is interesting to note that in Fry's classic work on Specific Performance, contracts of service appear in a small group under the sub- heading "Where enforced performance would be worse than non- performance". We may ask ourselves the question: for whom it would be worse and for whom it would be better. Where, in a country like ours, large numbers of people are unemployed and it is extremely difficult to find employment, an employee who is discharged from service may have to remain without means of subsistence for a long period of time. Damages equivalent to one or two months wages would be poor consolation to him. They would be wholly insufficient to sustain him during the period of unemployment following upon his discharge. The provision for damages for wrongful termination of service was adequate at a time when an employee could without difficulty find other employment within the period of reasonable notice for which damages were given to him. But in conditions prevailing in our country, damages are a poor substitute for reinstatement: they fall far short of the redress which the situation requires. To deny reinstatement to an employee by refusing specific performance in such a case would be to throw him to the mercy of the employer: it would enshrine the power of wealth by recognising the right of the employer to fire an employee by paying him damages which the employer can afford to throw away but which would be no recompense to the employee. It is, therefore, necessary and I venture to suggest, quite possible, within the limits of the doctrine that a contract of personal service cannot be specifically enforced, to take the view that in case of employment under a statutory body or public authority, where there is ordinarily no element of personal relationship, the employee may refuse to accept the repudiation of the contract of employment by the statutory body or public authority and seek reinstatement on the basis that the repudiation is ineffective and the contract is continuing. That is in effect what happened in the case of McClalland v. Northern lreland General Health Service Board(1). The plaintiff's contract in this case was really one of master and servant, the only special condition being that her post had been advertised as "permanent and pensionable" and it provided specific reasons, such as gross misconduct and inefficiency, for which she might be dismissed. The defendant Board introduced a rule after her appointment that women employees must resign on marriage and since the plaintiff got married, the respondents terminated her service by giving what they thought was a reasonable notice. The plaintiff contended that the defendant Board was not entitled to terminate her service and claimed a declaration that the purported termination was null and void and she continued in service. The House of Lords held that the contract was exhaustive as regards the reasons for which the defendant-Board could terminate the service of the plaintiff and since none of those reasons admittedly existed, the termination of service of the petitioner by the defendant-Board was nullity and the plaintiff continued in service of the defendant-Board. This was a case of a pure contract of master and servant and yet the House of Lords held that the termination of employment of the plaintiff by the defendant-Board which was not accepted by the plaintiff was ineffective and the plaintiff was entitled to a declaration that she continued in service. It should thus be possible to hold that even if a statutory body or public authority terminates the service of an employee in breach of a contractual obligation, the employee could disregard the termination as ineffective and claim a declaration that his service is continuing. But this would be a somewhat novel and unorthodox ground which has not been recognised by any decision of this Court so far and moreover I do not think that, on facts, this is a proper case in which it would really be applicable and hence I do not propose to finally pronounce upon it.

The second category of cases are those where the relationship between the employer and the employee is governed by statute or sub-ordinate legislation, and where such is the case, the termination, which is the same thing as repudiation, may, in a given situation, be null and void and in that event, it would not have the effect of putting an end to the contract and the employee would be entitled to a declaration that his service is continuing. The doctrine that a contract of personal service cannot be specifically enforced would not stand in the way of the employee, because the termination being null and void, there being no repudiation at all in the eye of the law, there would be no question of enforcing specific performance of the contract of employment. What the employee would be claiming in such a case is not enforcement of a contract of personal service but declaration of statutory invalidity of an act done by the employer. The case would be of a kind similar to that decided by the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in High Commissioner for India v. I. M. Lail(1) the essential feature of which was aptly and succinctly described by this Court in Dr. S. B. Dutt v. University of Delhi(2) in these words:

"That was not a case based on a contract of personal service... The declaration did not enforce a contract of personal service but proceeded on the basis that the dismissal could only be effected in terms of the statute and as that had not been done, it was a nullity, from which the result followed that the respondent had continued in service. All that the Judicial Committee did in this case was to make a declaration of a statutory invalidity of an act, which is a thing entirely different from enforcing a contract of personal service."
Where, for example, the termination is outside the powers of a statutory body either because the statutory body has no power to terminate the employment or because the termination is effected in breach of a mandatory obligation imposed by law which prescribes that the termination shall be effected only in a particular manner and no other, it would be a nullity and the employee would be entitled to ignore it and ask for being treated as still in service. such was the case in Life Insurance Corporation of India v. Sunil Kumar Mukherjee(3) where an order of termination of service of certain employee by the Life Insurance Corporation in breach of clauses 10(a) and 10(b) of an order passed by the Central Government under s. 11(g) of the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956, was held to be null and void on the ground that it was not effected in terms of clauses 10(a) and 10(b) of the Statutory Order. So also in Mafatlal Barot v. Divisional Controller, State Transport, Mahsana(4), this Court held that an order of termination of service passed against the petitioner in contravention of clause 4(b) of Schedule 'A' to the Regulations made by the State Road Transport Corporation in exercise of powers conferred under s. 45 of the Road Transport Corporations Act, 1950 was bad in law and it was quashed by issuing a writ of certiorari. This principle was also approved by this Court in B. N. Tewari v. District Board, Agra(1) though it was held there, on facts that the dismissal of the employee was proper and justified. Shah, J., speaking on behalf of this Court in that case recognised this principle and treated it as a third exception to the general rule in the following words:

"Under the common law the Court will not ordinarily force an employer to retain the services of an employee whom he no longer wishes to employ. But this rule is subject to certain well-recognised exceptions. It is open to the Courts in an appropriate case to declare that a public servant who is dismissed from service in contravention of Article 311 continues to remain in service, even though by so doing the State is in effect forced to continue to employ the servant whom it does not desire to employ. Similarly under the industrial law, jurisdiction of the labour and industrial tribunals to compel the employer to employ a worker whom he does not desire to employ, is recognised. The Courts are also invested with the power to declare invalid the act of a statutory body, if by doing the act the body has acted in breach of a mandatory obligation imposed by statute, even if by making the declaration the body is compelled to do something which it does not desire to do."
This position in law was reiterated by this Court in U.P. State Warehousing Corporation v. C. K. Tyagi(2) where, after referring to Dr. Dutt's case and S. R. Tewari's case, Vaidialingam, J., observed:

"From the two decisions of this Court referred to above, the position in law is that no declaration to enforce a contract of personal service will be normally granted. But there are certain well-recognised exceptions to this rule and they are: To grant such a declaration in appropriate cases regarding (1) a public servant, who has been dismissed from service in contravention of Art. 311. (2) Reinstatement of a dismissed worker under Industrial Law or Labour or Industrial Tribunals. (3) A statutory body when it has acted in breach of a mandatory obligation, imposed by statute."
This statement of law was reaffirmed again by this Court in Indian Airlines Corporation v. Sukhdeo Rai (3) and Bank of Baroda v. Jewan Lal Mehrotra(4).

Now, two questions immediately arise for consideration on this statement of law. The first is, what is the 'statutory body' contemplated in these decisions, and the second is, are the three exceptions formulated by this Court intended to be exhaustive ? When we are trying to understand what is the 'statutory body' which this Court had in mind when it laid down this statement of law, it must be remembered that a statement of law enunciated by this Court must be read in the light of the principle which it seeks to effectuate and it should not be construed as if it were a section. The third exception is intended to cover cases where by reason of breach of mandatory obligation imposed by law, as distinct from contract, the termination of service is null and void so that there is in law no repudiation at all. That is the principle on which the third exception is based and it is in the light of this principle that the expression 'statutory body' used by this Court has to be understood. Now, obviously, a body or authority created by statute would be a statutory body, but even a body or authority which is created under a statute, as for example, the State Road Transport Corporation which is created by the State under the Road Transport Corporation Act, 1950, would also be a statutory body. What other kinds of statutory bodies would be included is a matter not free from difficulty. But in any event it does appear to me that the three exceptions formulated in the statement of law laid down by this Court in the above decisions are not intended to be and cannot be exhaustive. The categories of exceptions to the general rule should not be closed, because any attempt at rigid and exhaustive formulation of legal rules- any attempt to put law in a strait jacket formula-is bound to stifle the growth of law and seriously cripple its capacity to adapt itself to the changing needs of society. In fact, Ray, J., as he then was, speaking on behalf of this Court in Sirsi Municipality v. Kom Francis(1) pointed out that the third exception applied not only to employees in the service of "bodies created under statutes", but also to those in the employment of "other public or local authorities". It may be a possible view-and some day this Court may have to consider it-that where law, as distinct from contract, imposes a mandatory obligation prescribing the kind of contract which may be entered into by an employer and the manner in which alone the service of an employee may be terminated, any termination of service effected in breach of such statutory obligation would be invalid and ineffective and in such a case the court may treat it as null and void. But I do not think it necessary to pursue this line of discussion any further and come to a positive conclusion whether the appellant is or is not a statutory body or a public authority nor do I consider it necessary to go into the question whether the Statutes of the Agra University had the force of law and conferred rights on the Principal and teachers of affiliated colleges, as in Prabhakar Ramakrishna Jodh v. A. L. Pande & Anr.(2), or they only set out the terms and conditions which had no validity and conferred no legal rights, unless and until they were embodied in the contract between the principal or teacher on the one hand and the affiliated college on the other as in Vidya Ram Mishra v. Managing Committee, Shri Jai Narain Conege(3). I take the view that on the second part of the question the case of the first respondent is well founded.

It was common ground between the parties that at the material time the Statute which was applicable to the appellant was the Kanpur and Meerut Universities Act, 1965. Section 28, sub-s. (3) of this Act declares that every decision by the management of an affiliated college to dismiss or remove from service a teacher shall be reported forthwith to the Vice-Chancellor and subject to the provisions contained in the Statutes shall not take effect unless it has been approved by the Vice-Chancellor. The language of this section is absolute and peremptory and leaves no doubt as to its meaning and effect. It provides in terms clear and unambiguous that the termination of service of a teacher by the management shall not take effect, that is, it shall be ineffective and inoperative unless the Vice-Chancellor on being informed has approved of it. When this section, which is a law made by the Legislatures, has enacted that the termination of service shall be ineffective or, in other words, it shall have no validity or force unless it has been approved by the Vice-Chancellor, it is difficult to see how it can be regarded as effectively terminating the service. To take such a view would be to refuse to give effect to the law enacted by the Legislature. The law enacted in this section operates, irrespective whether the management is or is not a statutory body. Such a consideration is entirely irrelevant to the applicability of this section. When the section says that the termination of service shall not have any effect, the Court must refuse to recognise the termination as valid and effective, and when the Court does so, it merely enforces the law and there is no question of transgressing the principle that a contract of personal service cannot be enforced. There can, therefore, be no doubt that the termination of service of the first respondent by the appellant was ineffective and void and it did not operate to put an end to the employment, even wrongful, by reason of s. 28, sub-s. (3) of the Kanpur and Meerut Universities Act, 1965.

The first respondent, on this view, would ordinarily be entitled to the declaration and injunction prayed for by him, but the relief of declaration and injunction being discretionary, I agree with the view taken in the judgment of my learned brother Fazal Ali, J., that having regard to the peculiar facts and circumstances of the present case as set out in his judgment, this is not a proper case where such relief of declaration or injunction should be granted to the first respondent: instead, the aggregate amount of Rs. 21,100/- deposited by the appellant in the Court would be fair and just compensation to the first respondent. However, I must hasten to make it clear that ordinarily an employee whose termination of service is found to be null and void or ineffective by reason of a statutory provision, and that would include subordinate legislation which has the force of law, should be awarded a declaration that he continues in service and it should be no ground for refusing him such declaration that before his purported termination of service, he was in employment only for a short period. That would be denying him security of tenure which the law seeks to give him in clear and unambiguous terms. But, in the present case, the circumstance which weighs most with me in refusing to exercise my discretion in favour of the first respondent is that if the relief of declaration and injunction is granted to the first respondent, it will involve the appellant in a financial liability of over Rs. One lakh and that would wipe out the educational institution of the appellant or in any event seriously cripple it and that, in its turn, would prejudicially affect the interests of the student community which is an important consideration which the Court cannot fail to take into account while determining what are the broad considerations of social justice which must guide its exercise of discretion.

I accordingly agree with the final order proposed by my learned brother.

V.P.S.					     Appeal allowed.
================================================================================


================================================================================
CASE 30:
[Cites 10, Cited by 144]
Chattisgarh High Court
Smt. Aparna Mishra vs State Of Chhattisgarh 36 Wa/17/2017 ... on 7 December, 2018
Bench: Ajay Kumar Tripathi, Parth Prateem Sahu
                                       1

                                                                     NAFR
           HIGH COURT OF CHHATTISGARH, BILASPUR

                    Judgment Reserved on:       23/10/2018

                   Judgment Delivered on :      07/12/2018


                         Writ Appeal No. 14 of 2017
     (Arising out of common order dated 02.01.2017 passed by the Learned
      Single Judge in Writ Petition (S) No. 2462 of 2014 & other connected
                                     matters)

1.       Gopi Sao S/o. Shri B. P. Sao, Aged About 40 Years Presently
         Posted As Lecturer, Government Polytechnic Janjgir, District Janjgir
         Champa Chhattisgarh
2.       B. S. Kanwar, S/o. Shri Phulsai Kanwar, Aged About 36 Years
         Presently Posted As Lecturer, Government Polytechnic Raigarh,
         District Raigarh Chhattisgarh
3.       H. C. Pandey, S/o. Shri Jagannath Pandey, Aged About 42 Years
         Presently Posted as Lecturer, Government Polytechnic Raigarh,
         District Raigarh Chhattisgarh
4.       Smt. S. Sintholey, W/o. Shri Manish Sintholey, Aged About 36 Years
         Presently Posted As Lecturer, Government Polytechnic Durg,
         District Durg Chhattisgarh
5.       U. Gupta D/o. Shri B. N. Gupta, Presently Posted As Lecturer,
         Government Polytechnic Rajnandgaon, District Rajnandgaon
         Chhattisgarh
6.       Vandana Tirkey D/o. Shri Rainu Tirkey, Presently Posted As
         Lecturer, Government Polytechnic Durg, District Durg Chhattisgarh
7.       Baba Martandya Prasad, S/o. Shri Uma Shankar, Aged About 36
         Years Presently Posted As Lecturer, Government Engineering,
         Bilaspur, District Bilaspur Chhattisgarh
8.       Sudhir Kumar Pandey, S/o. Shri M. S. Pandey, Aged About 37 Years
         Presently Posted As Lecturer, Government Polytechnic Takhatpur,
         District Bilaspur Chhattisgarh
9.       Ashish Saggar, S/o. Shri K. D. Saggar, Aged About 40 Years
         Presently Posted As Lecturer, Government Polytechnic College,
         Takhatpur, District Bilaspur Chhattisgarh
10.      Smt. Rashmi Swami W/o. Shri Rajeev Swami, Aged About 36 Years
         Presently Posted As Lecturer, Government Girls Polytechnic
         College, Raipur, District Raipur Chhattisgarh
                                   2

11.   Smt. Nidhi Shukla, W/o Dr. Neeraj Shukla, Aged About 47 Years
      Presently Posted As Lecturer, Government Girls Polytechnic
      College, Raipur District Raipur Chhattisgarh
12.   Smt. Saraddha Tiwari, W/o. Shri Lokesh Tiwari, Aged About 39
      Years Presently Posted As Lecturer, Government Girls Polytechnic
      College Raipur, District Raipur Chhattisgarh
13.   Smt. Alka Tiwari, W/o. Professor Kishore Kumar Tiwari, Aged About
      43 Years Presently Posted As Lecturer, Government Girls
      Polytechnic College Raipur, District Raipur Chhattisgarh
14.   Santosh Singh, S/o. Shri Rambadan Singh, Aged About 42 Years
      Presently Posted As Lecturer, Government Polytechnic College
      Ambikapur, District Surguja Chhattisgarh
15.   S. K. Gajendra, S/o. Shri R. Gajendra, Aged About 50 Years
      Presently Posted As Lecturer, Government Polytechnic College
      Dhamtari District Dhamtari Chhattisgarh
16.   Vikas Chopra, S/o. Shri Prem Chand Chopra, Aged About 47 Years
      Presently Posted As Lecturer, Government Polytechnic College
      Dhamtari District Dhamtari Chhattisgarh
17.   Kishore Sahu, S/o. Dr. (Shri) G. R. Sahu, Aged About 45 Years
      Presently Posted As Lecturer, Government Polytechnic College
      Durg, District Durg Chhattisgarh
18.   Abhijat Shukla, S/o. Shri Ashok Shukla, Aged About 40 Years
      Presently Posted As Lecturer, Government Polytechnic College
      Mahasamund, District Mahasamund Chhattisgarh
19.   Mrutyunjaya Satpathi, S/o. Shri Dhananjay Satpathi, Aged About 40
      Years Presently Posted As Lecturer, Government Polytechnic
      College Raipur, District Raipur Chhattisgarh
20.   Smt. Meenu Agrawal, W/o Shri Anand Agrawal, Aged About 42
      Years Presently Posted As Lecturer, Government Polytechnic
      College Raipur, District Raipur Chhattisgarh
21.   Tanmay Shrivastava, S/o. Shri G. L. Shrivastava, Aged About 44
      Years Presently Posted As Lecturer, Government Engineering
      College Jagdalpur, District Bastar Chhattisgarh
                                                        ---- Appellants
                               Versus
1.    State of Chhattisgarh Through The Secretary, Government of
      Chhattisgarh, Technical Education, Manpower And Planning
      Department, Mahanadi Bhawan, Mantralay, Naya Raipur, P. S.
      Rakhi, Chhattisgarh.
                                     3

2.    The Director, Directorate of Technical Education, Indrawati Bhawan,
      Naya Raipur, District Raipur Chhattisgarh
3.    The Chhattisgarh Public Service Commission, Through The
      Secretary, C G, P.S.C. Raipur, Chhattisgarh.
4.    Manmohan Singh Kurrey, S/o. Late Shri M. R. Kurre, Aged About 36
      Years Presently Posted As Lecturer, Govt. Engineering College
      Bilaspur, District Bilaspur Chhattisgarh
5.    G. Rajesh Kumar, S/o. Shri G. Krishna Kumar, Aged About 43 Years
      Presently Posted As Lecturer, Govt. Polytechnic College Jagdalpur,
      District Bastar Chhattisgarh
6.    Tejendra Prasad Singh, S/o. Shri S. P. Grewal, Aged About 37 Years
      Presently Posted As Lecturer, Govt. Engineering College, Jagdalpur,
      District Bastar Chhattisgarh
7.    Prabhakar Mishra, S/o. Shri D. D. Mishra, Aged About 42 Years
      Presently Posted As Lecturer, Govt. Engineering College, Jagdalpur,
      District Bastar At Jagdalpur, Chhattisgarh
8.    A. M. Bose, S/o. Shri A. C. Bose, Aged About 41 Years Presently
      Posted As Lecturer, Govt. Polytechnic College, Jagdalpur, District
      Bastar Chhattisgarh
9.    Toshan Kumar Shrivas, Lecturer Maths, Government Polytechnic
      Khairagarh, District- Rajnandgaon, Chhattisgarh
10.   Lalita Pandey, Lecturer English, Govt. Co-Polytechnic, College,
      Bilaspur, District Bilaspur, Chhattisgarh
11.   Smita Sonpipre, Lecturer, Mom, Government               Girls   Poly,
      Rajnandgaon, District Rajnandgaon, Chhattisgarh
12.   Indu Prabha Kawar, Lecturer Chemistry, Government Poly. Janjgir-
      Champa, District Janjgir-Champa, Chhattisgarh
13.   Danuj Kumar Markam, Assistant Professor, Chemistry. GEC Raipur,
      District Raipur, Chhattisgarh
14.   Priyanka Singh, Lecturer Chemistry, Government Polytechnic, Durg,
      District- Durg, Chhattisgarh
15.   Surendra Singh Gautam, Lecturer, Et And T, Government Girls
      Poly., Gariyaband, District Gariyaband, Chhattisgarh
16.   Sakshi Kala Singh, Lecturer, Et And T, Government Girls Poly.,
      Bilaspur, District Bilaspur, Chhattisgarh
17.   Monika Jain, Lecturer, Chemistry, Government Poly., Bhatapara,
      District Baloda Bazar- Bhatapara, Chhattisgarh
18.   Nisha Tilwani, Lecturer, Et And T, Government Poly., Kanker, District
      Kanker, Chhattisgarh
                                      4

19.   Anjali Jain, Lecturer, CDDM, Government Girls Poly., Raipur, District
      Raipur, Chhattisgarh
20.   Bhuneshwar Prasad, Lecturer, MOM, Government Poly.,durg,
      District Durg, Chhattisgarh
21.   Deeksha Tiwari, Lecturer, English, Government Girls Poly.,
      Rajnandgaon, District Rajnandgaon, Chhattisgarh
22.   Swati Singh, Lecturer, Pharmacy, Government Girls Poly., Raipur,
      District- Raipur, Chhattisgarh
23.   Humika Tamrakar, Lecturer CDDM, Government Girls Poly.,
      Rajnandgaon, District Rajnandgaon, Chhattisgarh
                                                        ---- Respondents


                      Writ Appeal No. 11 of 2017
      Dr. Rani Pushpa Baghel W/o. S. K. Baghel, Aged About 41 Years
      R/o House No. 69/503, Gayatari Nagar, Danganiya, Raipur
      Chhattisgarh, District Raipur Chhattisgarh
                                                            ---- Appellant
                                 Versus
1.    State of Chhattisgarh Through The Secretary, Government of
      Chhattisgarh, Technical Education, Man Power And Planning
      Department, Mahanadi Bhawan, Mantralaya, Naya Raipur, P. S.
      Rakhi, Chhattisgarh.
2.    The Director,    Directorate   of   Technical   Education,   Raipur,
      Chhattisgarh.
3.    The Public Service Commission, Through The Secretary, P S C,
      Raipur, Chhattisgarh.
4.    Ramnarayan Dewangan, Asstt. Professor Math, GEC, Bilaspur,
      Chhattisgarh
                                                         ---- Respondents


                      Writ Appeal No. 49 of 2017
      Sanjeev Kumar Singh S/o Shri Rajnarayan Singh, Aged About 42
      Years R/o Namnakala, Ambikapur, District Sarguja Chhattisgarh
                                                             ---- Appellant
                                 Versus
1.    State of Chhattisgarh Through The Secretary, Government of
      Chhattisgarh, Technical Education, Manpower And Planning
                                      5

        Department, Mahanadi Bhawan, Mantralaya, Naya Raipur, P. S.
        Rakhi Chhattisgarh.
2.      The Director, Directorate of Technical Education, Indravati Bhawan,
        Naya Raipur, P. S. Rakhi, Distt. Raipur Chhattisgarh.
3.      The Chhattisgarh Public Service Commission, Through The
        Secretary, C.G., P. S. C. Raipur, Chhattisgarh.
4.      Amit Kumar, Lecturer Mining, Government Poly, Ambikapur, District-
        Surguja, Chhattisgarh
                                                            ---- Respondents


                        Writ Appeal No. 12 of 2017
        Smt. Madhumalini John W/o Shri Somesh Kumar John, Aged About
        39 Years R/o B- 102, Siyaram Apartment, Opposite to City Mall,
        Mangla Chowk, Bilaspur, District Bilaspur, Chhattisgarh
                                                                ---- Appellant
                                   Versus
     1. State of Chhattisgarh Through Secretary, Department of Technical
        Education, Manpower, Science And Technology, Mahanadi Bhawan,
        Mantralaya, Capital Complex, New Raipur, District Raipur
        Chhattisgarh
     2. Director, Directorate of Technical Education, Manpower, Science
        And Technology, Chhattisgarh, Raipur Chhattisgarh
     3. Chhattisgarh Public Service Commission, Through Its Secretary,
        Chhattisgarh Public Service Commission, Raipur, District Raipur
        Chhattisgarh
     4. Principal, Govt.   Girls   Polytechnic   College,    Koni,    Bilaspur
        Chhattisgarh
     5. Principal, Govt.    Polytechnic     College,   Korea,     Baikunthpur
        Chhattisgarh
     6. Smt. Babita Yadav, W/o Shri Mrityunjay Yadav, Aged About 30 Years
        R/o Ring Road No. 2, Shanti Nagar, Bilaspur, District Bilaspur
        Chhattisgarh,
     7. Rajni Mandal, Lecturer Chemistry, Government Polytechnic College,
        Sukma, District- Sukma, Chhattisgarh
                                                            ---- Respondents
                                      6

                        Writ Appeal No. 13 of 2017
       Dr. Avinash Kumar Tripathi S/o Shri Shiv Sagar Tripathi, Aged About
       42 Years R/o House No. F- 10, Government Engineering College
       Colony, Dharampura, Police Station Jagdalpur, Jagdalpur, District
       Bastar, Chhattisgarh
                                                             ---- Appellant
                                  Versus
1.      State Of Chhattisgarh Through Secretary, Department Of Technical
        Education, Manpower, Science And Technology, Mahanadi Bhawan,
        Mantralaya, Capital Complex, New Raipur, District Raipur
        Chhattisgarh
2.      Director, Directorate Of Technical Education, Manpower, Science
        And Technology, Chhattisgarh, Raipur Chhattisgarh
3.      Chhattisgarh Public Service Commission, Through Its Secretary,
        Chhattisgarh Public Service Commission, Raipur, District Raipur
        Chhattisgarh
4.      Principal, Govt. Engineering College, Jagdalpur, District Bastar
        Chhattisgarh
5.      Ashok Kumar, Asstt. Professor English, GEC, Raipur, Chhattisgarh
                                                          ---- Respondents


                        Writ Appeal No. 18 of 2017
       Dr. Kishwar Khan D/o Mohd Akram Khan, Aged About 43 Years
       Working As Lecturer, English, Govt. Polytechnic College, Durg, Distt.
       Durg, Chhattisgarh
                                                             ---- Appellant
                                  Versus
     1. State of Chhattisgarh Through The Secretary, Department Of
        Technical Education, Man Power And Planning Department,
        Mahanadi Bhawan, Mantralaya, New Raipur, P.S. Rakhi, Distt
        Raipur, Chhattisgarh
     2. The Director, Directorate Of Technical Education, Byron Bazar,
        Raipur Chhattisgarh
     3. The Public Service Commission, Through The Secretary, P. S. C.
        Raipur Chhattisgarh
     4. Shameena Bano, Lecturer English, Govt. Co-Polytechnic, College,
        Raipur, Chhattisgarh
                                                         ---- Respondents
                                     7



                     Writ Appeal No. 19 of 2017
     Ku. Shalini Gupta D/o Shri K.P. Gupta Aged About 31 Years
     Occupation- Service, Lecturer- Mechanical Hod, Korodimal
     Polytechnic College, Raigarh, District- Raigarh, Chhattisgarh
                                                           ---- Appellant
                               Versus
1.   State of Chhattisgarh Through The Secretary Department Of
     Technical Education, Man Power And Planning Department,
     Mahanadi Bhawan, Mantralaya, New Raipur, P.S. Rakhi, District-
     Raipur, Chhattisgarh,
2.   The Director,    Directorate   Of   Technical   Education,   Raipur,
     Chhattisgarh
3.   The Public Service Commission, Through The Secretary, P.S.C.
     Raipur, Chhattisgarh.
4.   The Principal, Government Polytechnic College, Raigarh, District-
     Raigarh, Chhattisgarh
                                                      ---- Respondents


                     Writ Appeal No. 20 of 2017
1.   Vinod Kumar Joshi S/o Shri Dev Kumar Joshi, Aged About 28 Years
     Presently Posted As Lecturer, At Government Polytechnic College,
     Korba, Distt Korba, Chhattisgarh
2.   Mohd Irfan Khan, S/o Mohd Islam Khan, Aged About 33 Years
     Presently Posted As Lecturer, At Minimata Girls Polytechnic,
     Rajnandgaon, Distt. Rajnandgaon, Chhattisgarh
3.   Nilima Janardan, D/o Shri H. P. Janardan, Aged About 33 Years
     Presently Posted As Lecturer, At Govt. Girls Polytechnic, Raipur,
     Distt. Raipur, Chhattisgarh
4.   Jitendra Singh Chandra, S/o Shri Gulab Singh Chandra, Aged About
     27 Years Presently Posted As Lecturer, Government Engineering
     College, Raipur, Distt. Raipur Chhattisgarh
5.   Prashant Sharma, S/o Shri G. L. Sahu, Aged About 29 Years Posted
     As Lecturer, Minimata Girls Polytechnic College, Rajnandgaon, Distt
     Rajnandgaon, Chhattisgarh
6.   Rakesh Kumar, S/o Shri Mantu Ram, Aged About 28 Years
     Presently Posted As Lecturer, Government Polytechnic Khairagarh,
     Distt. Rajnandgaon, Chhattisgarh
                                    8

7.    Ruman     Singh    Chandrawanshi,       S/o    Shri Shiv Kumar
      Chandrawanshi, Aged About 28 Years Presently Posted As Lecturer,
      Govt. Polytechnic Korea, Distt. Korea, Chhattisgarh
8.    Roshin Tirkey, W/o Shri Anand Prakash Tirkey, Aged About 29 Years
      Presently Posted As Lecturer, Government Polytechnic Kabirdham,
      Distt. Kabirdham, Chhattisgarh
9.    Shresh Gupta, S/o Rajesh Kumar Gupta, Aged About 29 Years
      Presently Posted At Govt. Polytechnic College, Ambikapur, Distt.
      Surguja, Chhattisgarh
10.   Jitendra Kumar Dewangan, S/o Shri Radheshyam Dewangan, Aged
      About 32 Years Presently Posted As Lecturer, Govt. Girls College,
      Raipur, Distt. Raipur, Chhattisgarh
11.   Paleshwar Singh Patel, S/o Shri Dashrath Prasad Patel, Aged About
      34 Years Presently Posted As Lecturer, B R P Govt. Polytechnic
      Dhamtari, Distt. Dhamtari, Chhattisgarh
12.   Suryakant Sinha, S/o Hira Lal Sinha, Aged About 31 Years Presently
      Posted As Lecturer, B R P Government Polytechnic College,
      Dhamtari, Distt. Dhamtari, Chhattisgarh
13.   Awantika Vishwakarma, D/o Shri R. V. Vishwakarma, Aged About 37
      Years Presently Posted As Lecturer, Government Engineering
      College, Raipur, Chhattisgarh
14.   Meenu Sahu, D/o Late Jivkaran Sahu, Aged About 32 Years
      Presently Working As Lecturer, Govt. Engineering College, Raipur,
      Distt. Raipur, Chhattisgarh
15.   Shanti Rathore, W/o Shri Navnit Singh Rathore, Aged About 30
      Years Presently Working As Lecturer, Govt Polytechnic Takhatpur,
      Distt. Bilaspur, Chhattisgarh
16.   Raviprakash Pal, S/o Shri Hira Lal Prasad, Aged About 35 Years
      Presently Working As Lecturer, Govt. Polytechnic Khairagarh, Distt.
      Rajnandgaon Chhattisgarh
17.   Reena Dewangan, D/o Shri Hemlal Dewangan, Aged About 31
      Years Presently Working As Lecturer, Govt. Polytechnic Khairagarh,
      Distt. Rajnandgaon, Chhattisgarh
18.   Anjani Naik, W/o Shri R.J. Naik, Aged About 30 Years Presently
      Working As Lecturer, Kirodimal College, Raigarh, Distt. Raigarh,
      Chhattisgarh
19.   Dheeraj Agrawal, S/o Shri Kanti Lal Agrawal, Aged About 36 Years
      Presently Working As Lecturer, Govt. Polytechnic College Durg,
      Distt. Durg, Chhattisgarh
                                     9

20.   Khusbu Sharma, D/o Shri Prem Chand Sharma, Aged About 25
      Years Presently Working As Lecturer, Govt. Polytechnic College
      Durg, Distt. Durg, Chhattisgarh
21.   Vinod Kumar Dewangan, S/o Shri Amarnath Dewangan, Aged About
      26 Years Working As Lecturer, Govt. Polytechnic College,
      Ambikapur, Surguja Chhattisgarh
22.   Satyakam Sharma, S/o Shri Suryakant Sharma, Aged About 38
      Years Presently Working As Asst. Workshop Superintendent, B R P
      Govt. Polytechnic Rudri, Dhamtari, Distt. Dhamtari Chhattisgarh
                                                          ---- Appellants
                               Versus
1.    State Of Chhattisgarh Through The Secretary, Department Of
      Technical Education, Man Power And Planning Department,
      Mahanadi Bhawan, Mantralaya, New Raipur, P.S. Rakhi, Distt
      Raipur, Chhattisgarh
2.    The Director,   Directorate   Of   Technical   Education,   Raipur,
      Chhattisgarh
3.    The Public Service Commission, Through The Secretary, P.S.C.,
      Raipur, Chhattisgarh
4.    Deepak Kumar Shrivastava, Lecturer ET And T, Govt. Polytechnic
      College, Dhamtari, Chhattisgarh
5.    Mannu Kumar Nayak, Lecturer Mechanical, Govt. Polytechnic
      College, Khairagarh, District-Rajnandgaon, Chhattisgarh
6.    Omkant Gupta, Lecturer ET And T, Govt. Polytechnic College,
      Narayanpur, Chhattisgarh
7.    Neelkamal Sahu, Lecturer Electrical Govt. Polytechnic College,
      Sukma, Chhattisgarh
8.    Pradeep Kumar Rajput, Lecturer ET And T, Govt. Polytechnic
      College, Durg, Chhattisgarh
9.    Suman Das, Assistant Professor ET And T, Govt Engineering
      College, Raipur, Chhattisgarh
10.   Swastika Patel, Assistant Professor Mechanical, Govt. Engineering
      College, Raipur, Chhattisgarh
11.   Chandrakala Sahu, Lecturer ET And T, Govt. Polytechnic College,
      Ambikapur, District- Surguja, Chhattisgarh
12.   Chandani Patel, Lecturer Metallurgy, Govt. Polytechnic College,
      Durg, Chhattisgarh
13.   Nandini Sahu, Lecturer Computer Science, Govt. Polytechnic
      College, Durg, Chhattisgarh
                                     10

14.   Dashrath Kumar, Lecturer Computer Science, Govt. Polytechnic
      College, Jashpur, Chhattisgarh
15.   Neha Sahu, Lecturer Computer Science Govt. Polytechnic College,
      Raigarh, Chhattisgarh
16.   Vikas Kumar Bherpal, Lecturer Mechanical Govt. Polytechnic
      College, Raigarh, Chhattisgarh
17.   Krishna Kumar Patel, AWS, Govt. Polytechnic College, Korba,
      Chhattisgarh
18.   Swapnil Choubey, Lecturer ET and T, Govt. Polytechnic College,
      Takhatpur, District- Bilaspur, Chhattisgarh
                                                         ---- Respondents


                       Writ Appeal No. 21 of 2017
1.    Vandana Bhartendu W/o Mahfooz Arif, Aged About 39 Years R/o
      Rajkishore Nagar, Bilaspur, Police Station And Post Sarkanda, Civil
      And Revenue District Bilaspur, Chhattisgarh
2.    Versha Sao, W/o Rajendra Kumar Sahu, Aged About 40 Years R/o
      Railway Colony, Bilaspur, Police Station And Post Tarbahar, Civil
      And Revenue District Bilaspur, Chhattisgarh
                                                            ---- Appellants
                                 Versus
1.    State of Chhattisgarh Through Secretary, Department of Technical
      Education, Manpower, Science And Technology, Mahanadi Bhawan,
      Mantralaya, Capital Complex, New Raipur, District Raipur,
      Chhattisgarh
2.    Director, Directorate of Technical Education, Manpower, Science
      And Technology, Chhattisgarh, Raipur, Chhattisgarh
3.    Chhattisgarh Public Service Commission, Through Its Secretary,
      Chhattisgarh Public Service Commission, Raipur, District Raipur,
      Chhattisgarh
4.    Principal, Govt. Girls Polytechnic Koni, Bilaspur, Chhattisgarh
5.    Archana, Lecturer Chemistry, Government Polytechnic, Gariyaband,
      District Gariyaband, Chhattisgarh
                                                         ---- Respondents
                                     11

                        Writ Appeal No. 35 of 2017
1.      Tukesh Singh Thakur S/o Shri Gajanand Singh Thakur, Aged About
        33 Years R/o. Government Polytechnic Khairagarh, Distt.
        Rajnandgaon Chhattisgarh
2.      Ashish Kumar Jambulkar, S/o Shri Ganga Ram Jambulkar, Aged
        About 29 Years R/o Station Para, Ward No. 13, Teachers Colony,
        Rajnandgaon Distt. Rajnandgaon Chhattisgarh
                                                           ---- Appellants
                                  Versus
     1. State of Chhattisgarh Through The Secretary Department Of
        Technical Education, Man Power And Planning Department,
        Mahanadi Bhawan, Mantralaya, New Raipur, P. S. Rakhi, Distt.
        Raipur Chhattisgarh
     2. The Director, Directorate Of Technical Education, Manpower,
        Science And Technology, Raipur Chhattisgarh
     3. The Public Service Commission, Through The Secretary, P.S.C.,
        Raipur Chhattisgarh
     4. Secretary, General Administration Department, Mantralaya,
        Mahanadi Bhawan, New Raipur, Distt. Raipur Chhattisgarh
     5. Rajkumar Khote Lecturer Et And T, Govt. Girls Polytechnic College,
        Bilaspur, Chhattisgarh
                                                        ---- Respondents


                       Writ Appeal No. 221 of 2017
       Narayan Singh Burman S/o Late Lakhan Lal Burman, Aged About 42
       Years Occupation Ex- Lecturer Contract R/o Permanent R/o Village
       Persia, P. O. Badra Thakur, Police Station Pathariya Civil And
       Revenue District Mungeli Chhattisgarh.
                                                            ---- Appellant
                                  Versus
1.      State of Chhattisgarh Through Secretary, Department of Technical
        Education, Manpower, Science And Technology, Mahanadi Bhawan,
        Mantralaya, Capital Complex, New Raipur, District Raipur
        Chhattisgarh.
2.      Director, Directorate of Technical Education, Manpower, Science
        And Technology, Chhattisgarh, Raipur, Distt. Raipur, Chhattisgarh
3.      Chhattisgarh Public Service Commission, Through Its Secretary,
        Chhattisgarh Public Service Commission, Raipur, District Raipur,
        Chhattisgarh
                                     12

4.      Principal, Government Polytechnic Takhatpur,       Police   Station
        Takhatpur, Distt. Bilaspur, Chhattisgarh
5.      Kedar Sidar, Lecturer, Physics Government Polytechnic Takhatpur,
        Police Station Takhatpur District Bilaspur Chhattisgarh.
                                                        ---- Respondents
                       Writ Appeal No. 216 of 2017
     1. Gaurav Vishwakerma S/o G. D. Vishwakarma, Aged About 33 Years
        Occupation Lecturer Contrect Computer Science, Government
        Engineering College Bilaspur Chhattisgarh R/o Mig - Il /1 Chanderi
        Apartments Narmada Nagar Ring Road Bilaspur District Bilaspur
        Chattisgarh.
     2. Pramod Kumar Tirki, S/o Late Shri Alios Tirki, Aged About 44 Years
        Occupation- Assistant Workshop Superintendent, Government
        Engineering College, Bilaspur, R/o Q.F. 14, Government
        Engineering College Campus, Koni, Bilaspur, District Bilaspur,
        Chhattisgarh
                                                          ---- Appellants
                                  Versus
     1. State of Chhattisgarh Through Secretary, Department Of Technical
        Education, Manpower, Science And Technology, Mahanadi Bhawan,
        Mantralaya, Capital Complex, New Raipur, District Raipur
        Chhattisgarh
     2. Director, Directorate Of Technical Education, Manpower, Science
        And Technology, Chhattisgarh, Raipur, Chhattisgarh
     3. Chhattisgarh Public Service Commission, Through Its Secretary,
        Chhattisgarh Public Service Commission, Raipur, District Raipur,
        Chhattisgarh
     4. Principal, Govt. Engineering College Campus, Post Office- Koni,
        Bilaspur, Distt Bilaspur, Chhattisgarh
                                                        ---- Respondents


                       Writ Appeal No. 220 of 2017
1.      Manoj Kumar Tiwari S/o Girijanand Tiwari, Aged About 40 Years
        Occupation Ex- Lecturer Contract R/o C/o Kiran Bala Goswami
        Naya Sarkanda, Jabdapara Gali No. 1 Bilaspur, Police Station And
        Post Sarkanda, Civil And Revenue District Bilaspur Chhattisgarh.
2.      Sunil Kumar Viswakarama, S/o Janmajai Vishwakarma, Aged About
        32 Years Occupation Lecturer Contract, R/o C/o Santosh Baghel,
                                        13

       Koni, Police Station And Post Koni, Civil And Revenue District
       Bilaspur, Chhattisgarh
3.     Miss Anshumala, D/o Shri F. Ekka, Aged About 30 Years Occupation
       Lecturer Contract R/o Quarter No. 640, M. Q. Dipika Colony, P.O.
       Urja Nagar Korba, Police Station And Post Korba, Civil And
       Revenue District Korba, Chhattisgarh
                                                              ---- Appellants
                                  Versus
1.     State Of Chhattisgarh Through Secretary, Department Of Technical
       Education, Manpower, Science And Technology, Mahanadi Bhawan,
       Mantralaya, Capital Complex, New Raipur, District Raipur
       Chhattisgarh.
2.     Director, Directorate Of Technical Education, Manpower, Science
       And Technology, Chhattisdgarh, Raipur, Chhattisgarh
3.     Chhattisgarh Public Service Commission, Through Its Secretary,
       Chhattisgarh Public Service Commission, Raipur, District Raipur,
       Chhattisgarh
4.     Principal, Govt. Girls Polytechnic Koni, Bilaspur, Chhattisgarh Govt.
       Engineering College Campus Post Office Koni, Bilaspur, District
       Bilaspur, Chhattisgarh
                                                          ---- Respondents


                        Writ Appeal No. 105 of 2017
       Manish Upadhyay S/o Shri R. G. Upadhyay, Aged About 44 Years
       R/o A1 / A2, Kanchan Vihar Colony, Koni Bilaspur, Tahsil And District
       Bilaspur Chhattisgarh., Chhattisgarh
                                                              ---- Appellant
                                  Versus
     1. State of Chhattisgarh Through Secretary, Government of
        Chhattisgarh Technical Education, Man Power And Planning
        Department Mahanadi Bhawan, Mantralaya, Naya Raipur P. S.
        Rakhi Raipur Chhattisgarh.
     2. The Director,    Directorate    Of   Technical   Education,   Raipur,
        Chhattisgarh
     3. The Public Service Commission, Through The Secretary, P S C,
        Raipur, Chhattisgarh
                                                           ---- Respondents
                                        14

                           Writ Appeal No. 92 of 2017
     1. Umesh Sahu S/o Shri Mitrabhanu Sahu Aged About 28 Years R/o
        Village Narisinghpur, Post Jagdishpur, Block Pithora, P. S. Basana,
        District Mahasamund Chhattisgarh
     2. Dharmesh Kumar, S/o Shri Sitaram Dewangan, Aged About 25
        Years R/o Village And Post Amoda, Block Nawagarh, P. S.
        Nawagarh, District Janjgir Champa Chhattisgarh
     3. Khagesh Kumar Sahu, S/o Shri Muldas Sahu, Aged About 24 Years
        R/o Dewangan Mohalla, Ward No. 13, Near Panchayat Nawagarh,
        Post, P. S. And Block Nawagarh, District Janjgir Champa
        Chhattisgarh
                                                             ---- Appellants
                                  Versus
1.      State Of Chhattisgarh Through Its Secretary, Department Of
        Technical Education, Man Power And Planning, Mahanadi Bhawan,
        Mantralaya, Naya Raipur, Raipur Chhattisgarh
2.      The Director, Diectorate Of Technical Education,              Women
        Polytechnic Campus, Bairan Bazar, Raipur Chhattisgarh
3.      Chhattisgarh Public Service Commission, Through Its Secretary,
        Shankar Nagar Road, Raipur Chhattisgarh
4.      Government Polytechnic College, Narayanpur, Through Its Principal
        Tribal Rest House, Bakhrupara, Narayanpur Chhattisgarh
5.      Rituraj Singh, S/o Shri S. P. Singh, Aged About 26 Years R/o Maitri
        Sang Road, Kumarpara, Jagdalpur, Block Jagdalpur, P. S.
        Jagdalpur, District Bater Jagdalpur Chhattisgarh
                                                          ---- Respondents


                        Writ Appeal No. 93 of 2017
        Harsh Vardhan Singh Thakur S/o Late Shri Ranjan Singh Thakur
        Aged About 34 Years R/o Near Old C S I B Office Dharampura,
        Jagadalpur Distt. Bastar Jagadalpur Chhattisgarh
                                                               ---- Appellant
                                  Versus
1.      State Of Chhattisgarh Through Its Secretary Department Of
        Technical Education, Man Power And Planning, Mahanadi Bhawan,
        Mantralaya, Naya Raipur, Raipur Chhattisgarh
2.      The Director,    Directorate    Of   Technical   Education,   Raipur,
        Chhattisgarh
                                    15

3.    Chhattisgarh Public Service Commission, Through Its Secretary,
      Shankar Nagar Road, Raipur Chhattisgarh
4.    Government Engineering College, Jagadalpur Through Its Principal
      Jagadalpur Chhattisgarh
5.    George Ekka, S/o Late Shri John Ekka, Aged About 53 Years R/o
      Anugrah Dawan, Shanti Nagar, Jagdalpur, Police Station Bodhghat,
      District Bastar Jagdalpur Chhattisgarh
6.    Bhupendra Kumar Yadav S/o Late Shri Shiv Kumar Yadav, Aged
      About 25 Years R/o Q. No. 2/29, Akashvani Colony, Jagdalpur, Distt.
      Bastar Jagadalpur Chhattisgarh
7.    Sachin Bhakt Aged About 26 Years R/o E-2, Block Staff Colony,
      Dharanpura- 3, P. S. Parpa, District Bastar Jagadalpur Chhattisgarh
8.    R. Vikas Reddy S/o Late Shri R. Mohan Reddy, Aged About 34
      Years Jagdalpur, R/o Shubhas Ward No. 9, Near Hanuman Mandir
      Chowk, Bodhghat, Jagdalpur, Police Station Bodhghat, District
      Bastar Jagadalpur Chhattisgarh
9.    Manisha Dahariya, S/o Shri Resham Lal Dahariya, Aged About 24
      Years R/o 4f/2d Type, Hospital Sector, Dallirajhara, Police Station-
      Dallorajhara, District Balod Chhattisgarh
10.   Nitesh Kumar Sharma S/o Shri Mahesh Kumar Sharma Aged About
      25 Years R/o Uill, Post Koderar, Bastar District Bastar Jagadalpur
      Chhattisgarh
                                                        ---- Respondents
                      Writ Appeal No. 27 of 2017
1.    G. Rajesh Kumar S/o Shri G. Krishna Kumar Aged About 43 Years
      Presently Posted As Lecturer, Government Polytechnic College,
      Jagdalpur District Bastar at Jagdalpur, Chhattisgarh
2.    Tejendra Prasad Singh S/o Shri S.P. Grewal Aged About 37 Years
      Presently Posted As Lecturer, Govt. Engineering College, Jagdalpur,
      District Bastar at Jagdalpur, Chhattisgarh
3.    A. M. Bose S/o Shri A.C. Bose Aged About 41 Years Presently
      Posted As Lecturer, Govt. Polytechnic College, Jagdalpur, District-
      Bastar, Chhattisgarh
4.    Prabhakar Mishra S/o Shri D.D. Mishra Aged About 42 Years
      Presently Posted As Lecturer, Govt. Engineering College, Jagdalpur,
      District Bastar at Jagdalpur, Chhattisgarh
5.    Manmohan Singh Kurrey S/o Lt. Shri M.R. Kurre Aged About 36
      Years Presently Posted as Lecturer, Govt. Engineering College,
      Bilaspur, District- Bilaspur, Chhattisgarh
                                                          ---- Appellants
                                    16

                                Versus
1.    State Of Chhattisgarh Through The Secretary, Government Of
      Chhattisgarh, Technical Education, Man Power And Planning
      Department Mahanadi Bhawan, Mantralaya, Naya Raipur, P. S.
      Rakhi Distt. Raipur Chhattisgarh
2.    The Director, Directorate Of Technical Education, Raipur, District-
      Raipur, Chhattisgarh
3.    The Public Service Commission, Through The Secretary, Psc,
      Raipur, District- Raipur, Chhattisgarh
4.    Gopi Sao S/o Shri B.P. Sao Aged About 40 Years Presently Posted
      As Lecturer Government Polytechnic Janjgir, District Janjgir-
      Champa, Chhattisgarh
5.    B.S. Kanwar S/o Shri Phulsai Kanwar Aged About 36 Years
      Presently Posted As Lecturer, Govt. Polytechnic Raigarh, District-
      Raigarh, Chhattisgarh
6.    H.C. Pandey S/o Shri Jagannath Pandey Aged About 42 Years
      Presently Posted As Lecturer, Govt. Polytechnic Raigarh, District-
      Raigarh, Chhattisgarh
7.    Smt. S. Sintholey W/o Shri Manish Sintholey Aged About 36 Years
      Presently Posted As Lecturer, Govt. Polytechnic, Durg, District-
      Durg, Chhattisgarh
8.    U. Gupta D/o Shri B.N. Gupta Presently Posted As Lecturer, Govt.
      Polytechnic Durg, District- Durg, Chhattisgarh
9.    Vandana Tirkey D/o Shri Rainu Tirkey Presently Posted As Lecturer,
      Govt. Polytechnic, Durg, District- Durg, Chhattisgarh
10.   Baba Martandya Prasad S/o Shri Uma Shankar Aged About 36
      Years Presently Posted As Lecturer, Govt. Engineering College
      Bilaspur, District Bilaspur, Chhattisgarh
11.   Sudhir Kumar Pandey S/o Shri M.S. Pandey Aged About 37 Years
      Presently Posted As Lecture, Govt. Polystechnic Takhatpur, District-
      Bilspur, Chhattisgarh
12.   Ashish Saggar S/o Shri M.S. Pandey Aged About 40 Years
      Presently Posted As Lecturer, Govt. Polytechnic College, Takhatpur,
      District Bilaspur, Chhattisgarh
13.   Smt. Rashmi Swami W/o Shri Rajiv Swami Aged About 36 Years
      Presently Posted As Lecturer, Govt. Polytechnic College, Raipur,
      District- Raipur, Chhattisgarh
14.   Smt. Nidhi Shukla W/o Dr. Nawal Bajpai Aged About 47 Years
      Presently Posted As Lecturer, Govt. Polytechnic College, Raipur,
      District- Raipur, Chhattisgarh
                                    17

15.   Smt. Sharddha Tiwari W/o Shri Lokesh Tiwari Aged About 39 Years
      Presently Posted As Lecturer, Govt. Polytechnic College, Raipur,
      District-Chhattisgarh
16.   Smt. Alka Tiwari W/o Professor Kishore Kumar Tiwari Aged About
      43 Years Presently Posted As Lecturer, Govt. Polytechnic College,
      Raipur, District- Raipur, Chhattisgarh
17.   Santosh Singh S/o Shri Rambadan Singh Aged About 42 Years
      Presently Posted As Lecturer, Govt. Polytechnic College,
      Ambikapur, District- Surguja, Chhattisgarh
18.   S.K. Gajendra S/o Shri R. Gajendra Aged About 50 Years Presently
      Posted As Lecturer, Govt. Polytechnic College, Dhamtari, District-
      Dhamtari, Chhattisgarh
19.   Vikas Chopra S/o Shri Prem Chand Chopra Aged About 47 Years
      Presently Posted As Lecturer, Govt. Polytechnic College, Dhamtari,
      District- Dhamtari, Chhattisgarh
20.   Kishore Sahu S/o Dr. (Shri) G.R. Sahu Aged About 45 Years
      Presently Posted As Lecturer, Govt. Polytechnic College, Durg,
      District- Durg, Chhattisgarh
21.   Abhijat Shukla S/o Shri Ashok Shukla Aged About 40 Years
      Presently Posted As Lecturer, Govt. Polytechnic College,
      Mahasamund, District- Mahasamund, Chhattisgarh
22.   Mrityunjay Satpathi S/o Shri Dhananjay Satpathi Aged About 40
      Years Posted As Lecturer, Govt. Polytechnic College, Raipur,
      District- Raipur, Chhattisgarh
23.   Smt. Meetu Agrawal D/o Shri Anand Agrawal Aged About 42 Years
      Presently Posted As Lecturer, Govt. Polytechnic College, Raipur,
      District- Raipur, Chhattisgarh
24.   Tanmay Shrivastav S/o Shri G.L. Shrivastava Aged About 44 Years
      Presently Posted As Lecturer, Govt. Polytechnic College, Jagdalpur,
      District Bastar, Chhattisgarh
25.   Deleted (P.K. Singh) as per Honble Court Order Dated 22.7.2016
26.   Deleted (Seema Bishwas) as per Honble Court Order Dated
      3.10.2016
27.   Manjeet Singh Sonwani, Assistant Professor, Govt. Engineering
      College, Raipur, District- Raipur, Chhattisgarh
28.   Anil Kumar Khatri Assistant Professor, Maths Govt. Engineering
      College, Raipur, District Raipur, Chhattisgarh
29.   Hem Prasad Patel, Assistant Professor, Chemistry Govt.
      Engineering College, Bilaspur, District- Bilaspur, Chhattisgarh
                                      18

30.   Ganesh Ram Banjare, Assistant Professor,              Physics    Govt.
      Engineering College, Raipur, Chhattisgarh
                                                          ---- Respondents
                       Writ Appeal No. 25 of 2017
      Dr. Smt. Bhavna Nigam W/o. Deepak Nigam, Aged About 40 Years
      C/o. Dr. R. C. Saxena, Vinoba Nagar, Opposite Gayatri Temple,
      Bilaspur, Police Station Civil Lines, Bilaspur, Post Civil Lines, Civil
      And Revenue District Bilaspur Chhattisgarh.
                                                              ---- Appellant
                                  Versus
1.    State Of Chhattisgarh Through Secretary, Department Of Technical
      Education, Manpower, Science And Technology, Mahanadi Bhawan,
      Mantralaya, Capital Complex, New Raipur, District Raipur
      Chhattisgarh
2.    Director, Directorate Of Technical Education, Manpower, Science
      And Technology, Chhattisgarh, Raipur Chhattisgarh
3.    Chhattisgarh Public Service Commission, Through Its Secretary,
      Chhattisgarh Public Service Commission, Raipur, District Raipur
      Chhattisgarh
4.    Principal, Govt. Engineering College, Bilaspur, Chhattisgarh.
5.    Dr. Smt. Damyanti Patel W/o Dr. R. N. Patel, Aged About 47 Years
      C/o Shri G. S. Choudhari, Maa Chandrakanta Colony, Lingiyadih,
      Rajkishore Nagar, Police Station Sarkanda, Post Bilaspur, Civil And
      Revenue District Bilaspur Chhattisgarh
6.    Archana Singhdev, Assistant Professor, English, Govt. Engineering
      College, Raipur, District- Raipur, Chhattisgarh
                                                          ---- Respondents


                       Writ Appeal No. 15 of 2017
      Smt. Aparna Mishra W/o Shri Ramendra Mishra, Aged About 48
      Years Lecturer Civil, Uday Prasad Uday Government Polytechnic,
      Durg, District Durg, Chhattisgarh
                                                              ---- Appellant
                                  Versus
1.    State Of Chhattisgarh Through The Secretary, Technical Education,
      Man Power And Planning Department, Mahanadi Bhawan,
      Mantralaya, Naya Raipur, Raipur, Chhattisgarh
                                     19

2.   Director, Directorate Of Technical Education, 4th Floor, Third Block,
     Indrawati Bhawan, Naya Raipur, District Raipur, Chhattisgarh
3.   Chhattisgarh Public Service Commission, Through The Secretary,
     Public Service Commission, Shankar Nagar Road, Raipur,
     Chhattisgarh
                                                       ---- Respondents


                     Writ Appeal No. 17 of 2017
     Amitabh Shadangi S/o. Late Shri Gajanan Shadangi, Aged About 49
     Years R/o. Ramgudi Para, Ganja Chowk, Raigarh, Civil And
     Revenue District Raigarh Chhattisgarh
                                                           ---- Appellant
                                Versus
1.   State Of Chhattisgarh Through The Secretary, Government Of
     Chhattisgarh, Technical Education, Manpower And Planning
     Department, Mahanadi Bhawan, Mantralay, Naya Raipur, P. S.
     Rakhi, Chhattisgarh.
2.   The Director,    Directorate    Of   Technical   Education,   Raipur
     Chhattisgarh
3.   The Public Service Commission, Through The Secretary, P S C,
     Raipur, Chhattisgarh
                                                       ---- Respondents


                     Writ Appeal No. 26 of 2017
     Smt. S.P. Francis @ Priya Albert Dass W/o Shri Yogesh Albert Dass,
     Aged About 35 Years Lecturer, Government Engineering College,
     Bilaspur, District Bilaspur, Chhattisgarh
                                                           ---- Appellant
                                Versus
1.   State Of Chhattisgarh Through The Secretary, Government Of
     Chhattisgarh Technical Education Man Power And Planning
     Department Mahanadi Bhawan, Mantralaya, Naya Raipur, District
     Raipur, Chhattisgarh
2.   The Director, Directorate Of Technical Education, Raipur, District
     Raipur, Chhattisgarh
3.   The Public Service Commission, Through The Secretary, Public
     Service Commission, Raipur, Dsitriict Raipur, Chhattisgarh
                                                       ---- Respondents
                                   20



                     Writ Appeal No. 22 of 2017
1.   Dr. Smt. Neena Rai W/o Shri Praveen Rai, Aged About 47 Years
     Lecturer, Government Engineering College, Bilaspur, R/o Imlipara,
     Bilaspur, District Bilaspur, Chhattisgarh
2.   Smt. Asha Soni, W/o Late Shri Rakesh Kumar Soni, Aged About 41
     Years Lecturer, Government Engineering College, Bilaspur, R/o Qtr.
     No. 1/28, Rama Green City, Khamtarai Road, Bilaspur, District
     Bilaspur, Chhattisgarh
                                                        ---- Appellants
                               Versus
1.   State Of Chhattisgarh Through The Secretary, Government Of
     Chhattisgarh, Technical Education Man Power And Planning
     Department, Mahanadi Bhawan, Mantralaya, Naya Raipur, Distt
     Raipur Chhattisgarh
2.   The Director, Directorate Of Technical Education, Govt. Girls
     Polytechnic Campus, Byron Bazar, Raipur, District Raipur,
     Chhattisgarh
3.   The Public Service Commission, Through The Secretary, Public
     Service Commission, Shankar Nagar Road, Raipur, District Raipur,
     Chhattisgarh
4.   Navin Kumar Verma, Assistant Professor Chemistry Government
     Engneering College, Koni District Bilaspur, Chhattisgarh
5.   Vandana Jangde, Assistant Professor Chemistry, Government
     Engineering College, Sejbahar, Old Dhamtari Raod, District- Raipur,
     Chhattisgarh
                                                      ---- Respondents


                     Writ Appeal No. 32 of 2017
     Dr. Smt. Damyanti Patel W/o Dr. R. N. Patel, Aged About 47 Years
     C/o Shri G. S. Choudhari, Maa Chandrakanta Colony, Lingiadih,
     Rajkishore Nagar, Police Station Sarkanda, Post Bilaspur, Civil And
     Revenue District Bilaspur, Chhattisgarh
                                                         ---- Appellant
                               Versus
1.   State of Chhattisgarh Through Secretary, Department Of Technical
     Education, Manpower, Science And Technology, Mahanadi Bhawan,
     Mantralaya, Capital Complex, New Raipur, District Raipur,
     Chhattisgar
                                      21

2.      Director, Directorate Of Technical Education, Manpower, Science
        And Technology, Chhattisgarh, Raipur, Chhattisgarh
3.      Chhattisgarh Public Service Commission, Through Its Secretary,
        Chhattisgarh Public Service Commission, Raipur District Raipur,
        Chhattisgarh
4.      Principal, Govt. Engineering College, Bilaspur, Chhattisgarh
5.      Dr. Smt. Bhavna Nigam, W/o Deepak Nigam, Aged About 40 Years
        C/o Dr. R. C. Saxena, Vinoba Nagar, Oppsite Gayatri Temple,
        Bilaspur, Police Statioin Civil Lines, Bilaspur, Civil And Revenue
        District Bilaspur, Chhattisgarh
6.      Arti Shrivastavam, Asst. Professor Mathematics, Government
        Engineering Collage, Jagdalpur, Chhattisgarh
                                                          ---- Respondents


                        Writ Appeal No. 89 of 2017
        Ram Naresh Hinduja S/o Late Dr. B. G. Hinduja, Aged About 39
        Years R/o Paras Nagar, Raipur, Tehsil And District Raipur
        Chhattisgarh.
                                                              ---- Appellant
                                  Versus
     1. State Of Chhattisgarh Through The Secretary, Government Of
        Chhattisgarh, Technical Education, Manpower And Planning
        Department, Mahanadi Bhawan, Mantralaya, Naya Raipur, P. S.
        Rakhi, Chhattisgarh.
     2. The Director, Directorate Of Technical Education, Indravati Bhavan,
        Naya Raipur Chhattisgarh.
     3. The Chhattisgarh Public Service Commission, Through The
        Secretary, C. G. P. S. C. Raipur, Chhattisgarh., District : Raipur,
        Chhattisgarh
     4. Shailee Kesharwani, Lecturer Pharmacy, Government Girls Poly.,
        Raipur, District- Raipur, Chhattisgarh
                                                          ---- Respondents


                        Writ Appeal No. 125 of 2017
        Dr. Dinesh Uthra S/o Chhabil Das Uthra, Aged About 45 Years R/o
        Sai Krupa Matra Chaya, Near Priyadarshani Nagar, Ring Road,
        Bilaspur, District Bilaspur Chhattisgarh.
                                                              ---- Appellant
                                    22

                              Versus
1.   State Of Chhattisgarh Through The Secretary, Government Of
     Chhattisgarh, Technical Education, Manpower And Planning
     Department, Mahanadi Bhawan, Mantralaya, Naya Raipur, P. S.
     Rakhi, Chhattisgarh., Chhattisgarh
2.   The Director,   Directorate   of Technical    Education,    Raipur,
     Chhattisgarh
3.   The Chhattisgarh Public Service Commission, Through The
     Secretary, Chhattisgarh P. S. C. Raipur, Chhattisgarh.
4.   Vineet Kumar Shukla, Assistant Professor Physics, Government
     Engineering, College, Raipur, District- Raipur, Chhattisgarh
                                                       ---- Respondents




                     Writ Appeal No. 145 of 2017
     Sameer Kumar Shastri S/o Late Shri K. K. Shastri, Aged About 51
     Years Occupation Service, Presently Working As Lecturer At
     Government Engineering College, Raipur, R/o Dayitva, Near Sahu
     Sadan, Kela Badi, Durg District Durg Chhattisgarh.
                                                          ---- Appellant
                              Versus
1.   State Of Chhattisgarh Through The Secretary, Department Of
     Technical Education, Manpower, Science And Technology,
     Mahanadi Mantralaya, Naya Raipur, Post Office And Police Station
     Naya Raipur, District Raipur Chhattisgarh.
2.   Director, Directorate Of Technical Education, Manpower, Science
     And Technology, Chhattisgarh, Raipur Chhattisgarh.
3.   Chhattisgarh Public Service Commission, Through Its Secretary,
     Raipur Chhattisgarh.
4.   Principal, Government Engineering College, Purani Dhamtari Road,
     Village Shejbehra, Raipur Chhattisgarh.
5.   Rahul Gupta S/o Shri R.K. Gupta Aged About 27 Years R/o C-4
     Amaltaspuram, Dhamtari, Tahsil And District- Dhamtari,
     Chhattisgarh
                                                     ---- Respondents
                                           23



       For Appellants         : Dr. N.K.Shukla, Senior Advocate with Shri Vinod
                                Deshmukh, Shri Kishore Bhaduri, Shri Rajeev
                                Shrivastava, Smt. Meena Shastri, Shri Mateen
                                Siddique, Shri Anoop Majumdar, Shri Manoj
                                Paranjpe, Shri Amrito Das, Shri Sourabh Sharma,
                                Ms. Deepali Pandey, Ms. Sunita Jain, Ms.
                                Madhunisha Singh, Shri Pawan Kesharwani, Shri
                                Rajendra Tripathi, Shri Rahul Tamaskar, Shri
                                Rakesh Dubey, Shri Aditya Sharma, Shri Sunny
                                Agrawal and Ms. Ruchi Nagar, Advocates.

       For Respondent     / : Shri Y.S.Thakur, Additional Advocate General
       State

       For Respondent     /     Shri Ashok Verma, Shri Y.C.Sharma, Shri
       CGPSC                    Abhishek Sinha, Shri Ashish Shrivastava, Shri
                                B.D.Guru, Shri Sudeep Agrawal, Shri Ajay Kumar
                                Chandra, Shri Sachin Nidhi, Ms. S.Harshita,
                                Ms. Lata Nayak, Ms. Chhaya Gabel, Shri
                                N.D.Quadari and Ms. Medha Shrivastava,
                                Advocates.

       For Intervenors        : Shri Sunil Otwani, Shri Harsh Wardhan, Shri
                                N.K.Malviya, Shri Manish Upadhyay, Shri Neeraj
                                Choubey and Shri Hari Agrawal, Advocates.



                  Hon'ble Shri Ajay Kumar Tripathi, Chief Justice
                  Hon'ble Shri Parth Prateem Sahu, Judge

                                  C.A.V. Judgment


Per Ajay Kumar Tripathi, Chief Justice


  1.         These appeals have been preferred against a common judgment

  rendered by the learned Single Judge in a batch of writ applications which

  came to be clubbed and heard altogether since they arose out of

  appointments or engagements on the post of Assistant Professors in the

  Government Engineering Colleges and on the post of Lecturers in the
                                           24

Government Polytechnic Colleges, in the State of Chhattisgarh. When the

State Government decided to issue a fresh advertisement to fill up the posts

held by the Appellants, writ applications were filed. In the alternative, some of

the Petitioners wanted quashing of the advertisement of the year 2015

whereas others wanted absorption/regularisation keeping in mind their long

period of working on contract.


2.         Another category of the Appellants are those who have been

appointed as part-time Assistant Professors and Lecturers and working in the

Government Engineering and Polytechnic Colleges, respectively, for a

significant period of time and desire regularisation of their services.


3.         Learned Single Judge dismissed the writ applications refusing to

give the Appellants relief of either quashing the advertisement or giving a

direction for regularisation.


4.         For convenience, Writ Appeal No. 14 of 2017 i.e. case of Gopi Sao

& Others v. State of Chhattisgarh & Others was treated as the lead case. The

broad facts and materials are being relied from the said writ appeal.


5.         It has been argued by the learned counsel for the Appellants that

even before the creation of State of Chhattisgarh, the State Engineering and

Polytechnic Colleges were understaffed and there was dire needs of faculty to

run these institutions for a long period of time. No appointments of significance

came to be ever made. The situation became even more grim after the State

of Chhattisgarh was created in the year 2000. To meet the exigency, the State

Government, in the year 2002 issued a notification dated 08.07.2002 in

exercise of power under Article 309 of the Constitution of India. The said rule

was known as the Chhattisgarh Technical Education Three Years Contract
                                         25

Service (Appointment and Service Conditions) Rules, 2002 (hereinafter

referred to as 'the 2002 Rules').


6.        The 2002 Rules laid down the eligibility, the modality of selection

and it had all the attributes of a regular appointment under the State except

that it was meant to be a contractual appointment for a period of three years.


7.        In furtherance to the 2002 Rules, an advertisement was issued for

appointment on the post of Lecturers for a period of three years against

sanctioned vacant posts in the different Government Engineering and

Polytechnic Colleges. The advertisement which followed the notification of the

2002 Rules is a pointer to the fact that due process was followed in the

selection and only those who were found qualified, competent and eligible

based on their merit position as well as by following the reservation roster,

letters of appointment came to be issued. These appointments came to be

made in the year 2004 and thereafter. The appointments though on contract,

was on regular sanctioned posts which were lying vacant. Ever since their

appointment, the Appellants have continued to work till their bunch of writ

applications came to be dismissed on 02.01.2017 but were granted protection

in the appeals at the time of admission vide order dated 05.05.2017 passed in

Writ Appeal No. 11 of 2017 and the connected cases.


8.        Even though, the 2002 Rules categorically stated that on expiry of a

period of three years, the contract would automatically end, but obviously

there was no desire or option available to the State Government to do away

with the services of the Appellants after they were appointed. The stand of the

Appellants' counsel is that the nature of such engagement may have its origin

in contract but since neither the State nor the appointing authorities were
                                          26

dissatisfied with the services of the Appellants or for reasons best known to

them, could not dispense with their services. Though to circumvent the law,

they used to keep renewing the contract one after the other. A long period of

continued engagement with no whisper or stand taken by the State that these

appointments were in any manner illegal or irregular is a pointer to their status.

Though the State labelled the initial engagement of the Appellants to be on

contract but they never adhered to their own Rule of doing away with their

service after three years. The terminology sans the methodology now cannot

be used for dispensing with the services of the Appellants, since it will neither

be fair to the Appellants, since the best of their life has already gone by

serving the State nor can the State be permitted to resort to the concept of

'hire and fire' like a private employer. Most of these Appellants have worked

anything between 10 - 14 years except for those who were removed for their

acts of omission or commission or incompetence.


9.        Besides the bunch of the Appellants who were appointed under the

2002 Rules, Rules were also notified in the years 2004 and 2012. More

appointments came to be made following the same process and procedure

after due advertisement. Therefore, the only difference between some set of

the Appellants and others is the period when they came to be engaged.


10.       While pressing their writ applications, the Appellants brought to the

notice of the learned Single Judge a decision which came to be rendered by a

Division Bench of the Bombay High Court which was the case of Sachin

Ambadas Dawale & Others v. The State of Maharashtra & Another {Writ

Petition No. 2046 of 2010}, decided on 19.10.2013. The reason why the

Appellants placed reliance on the said Division Bench judgment was because

there is a lot of similarity in the facts as well as the legal proposition between
                                          27

the case decided by the Bombay High Court and the issues before the learned

Single Judge.


11.       The facts of the case before the Bombay High Court was that the

Petitioners therein were appointed as Lecturers in different departments of

Government Polytechnic in the State of Maharashtra. These appointments

were made in terms of the so-called policy dated 25.07.2002 and subsequent

modified resolutions dated 02.08.2003 and 03.10.2003. Their grievance was

that they have been in the employment of the Respondents for a long period

ranging from 3 - 10 years but are being denied the benefit of permanency or

permanent appointment. There also, initial appointments were said to be on

contract. The stand of the State before the Division Bench was that the

Petitioners have no legal right to invoke extraordinary jurisdiction of the Court

since they were contractual employees and they had accepted the

employment with full knowledge that they cannot claim regularisation or

permanency. In the said case, as in the present case, reliance was placed on

the case of Secretary, State of Karnataka & Others v. Uma Devi & Others,

reported in AIR 2006 SC 1806 (1) : (2006) 4 SCC 1 by State of Maharashtra.


12.       The Division Bench of Bombay High Court, in Sachin Ambadas

Dawale (supra) rendered the following opinion:


         "10.      We have considered the submissions on behalf of the
         petitioners and the respondents. It is undisputed that the
         appointments of the petitioners are as per the policy
         incorporated in the Government resolution dated 25th of July,
         2002 in which it is laid down that the appointments will be on
         contractual basis and till the availability of the candidates
         appointed through regular selection process. However, it is
         important to consider that the petitioners are appointed after
         following the procedure of issuance of advertisement and
         conducting interviews by a duly constituted Selection Committee.
         The Selection Committee constituted as per the Government
         resolution dated 2nd August, 2003 comprises of highly
         experienced and technical persons like :
                                   28

(i) Joint Director,Technical Education Department,

(ii) representative of women,

(iii) Principal of the concerned institution,

(iv) representative of backward class, and

(v) two Experts of concerned subject.

In view of the above facts, it cannot be said that the
appointments of the petitioners are back door or illegal. It cannot
be said that the petitioners are appointed arbitrarily or
haphazardly or clandestinely without issuing advertisement and
without giving an opportunity to all the eligible candidates to
participate in the selection process. From the record it clearly
appears to be an undisputed position that in response to the
advertisement several candidates had participated in the
selection process and it is the petitioners who were found eligible
and suitable for the posts and as such were selected and
appointed. It is not the case of the respondents that any
illegalities took place during the selection process.

11.     We have discussed earlier, that after the tenure of two
years of the appointment of the petitioners came to an end, the
respondent - Government issued the resolution dated 26th
October, 2005 and continued the Lecturers for the further period
of two years. It is to be noted that the Government of
Maharashtra has stated in the affidavit filed before this Court that
it had decided to continue the services of the contractual
employees after giving four to five days' break until the
candidates selected through MPSC are available and that the
Government of Maharashtra had decided to grant 30 days' leave
to these employees and had increased monthly package of
these employees. These factors show that the posts, in which
these employees are appointed on contractual basis, are
permanent and full time posts and the services of these
employees were required by the Government of Maharashtra to
discharge its "constitutional obligation" of imparting education.

12.      The contention of the State Government as to whether
the posts should be filled on a regular basis or contractual basis
is a policy matter and cannot be within the domain of the judicial
review of this Court is without substance. The State Government
is a "Model Employer" and is obliged to follow the Constitutional
Scheme. It is not in dispute that after their selection, the
petitioners have worked for a period between 3 years to 10
                                 29

years. In this respect we may gainfully      refer to the following
observations of the Hon'ble Apex Court in    case of Radha Dubey
V/s. Govt. of NCT of Delhi and Ors. in       the order dated 16th
August, 2010 in Special Leave                 to Appeal (Civil)
No.CC10388/2010 :-

    "We are prima facie of the view that appointment of a
    person on contract basis for an uninterrupted period of ten
    years amounts to exploitation. The State, as a model
    employer in a welfare State, is not expected to take
    advantage of its position and impose wholly unequitable
    and unreasonable condition of employment on the
    prospective employees, who do not have the choice but to
    accept the appointment on terms and conditions offered by
    the employer. This practice seems to be contrary to the
    ratio of the judgments of this Court in Central Inland Water
    Transport Corporation Ltd. and another versus Brojo Nath
    Ganguly and another [AIR 1986 SC 1571] and Delhi
    Transport Corporation versus D.T.C. Mazdoor Congress
    [AIR 1991 SC 101]."

  It is to be noted that having observed this, the Hon'ble Apex
court in the peculiar facts of the case had directed the
respondents to take the petitioners back in service by an interim
order. The facts of the present case are almost identical. The
Government has extracted the work from the petitioners for
years together after they were found eligible and suitable in the
selection process, conducted by the Selection Committees,
which are constituted in pursuance to the Government
Resolution.

13.      Insofar as the contention of the respondents that the
petitioners were aware that their appointment was for a limited
period on contract basis and as such they are not entitled to
claim regularization is concerned, the said submission is also
without substance. It is not in dispute that during this period i.e.
up to 2010 the appointments which were made, were made only
through the process by which the petitioners were selected. It is
not as if during the said period MPSC was also conducting the
selection process simultaneously. It is not therefore as if the
petitioners had choice to participate in the selection process
through MPSC as well as through the Committees constituted
under the said Government Resolution. The petitioners had no
choice but to participate in the selection process conducted
through the Committees constituted under the said Government
Resolution. The Hon'ble Apex Court in case of Central Inland
Water Transport Corporation Ltd. V/s. Brojo Nath Ganguly (AIR
1986 SC 1571) has observed as follows :-
                                  30

    ".........Article 14 of the Constitution guarantees to all
    persons equality before the law and the equal protection of
    the laws. The principle deducible from the above
    discussions on this part of the case in consonance with right
    and reason, intended to secure social and economic justice
    and conforms to the mandate of the great equality clause in
    Article 14. This principle is that the Courts will not enforce
    and will, when called upon to do so, strike down an unfair
    and unreasonable contract, or an unfair and unreasonable
    clause in a contract, entered into between parties who are
    not equal in bargaining power...... it will apply to situations in
    which the weaker party is in a position in which he can
    obtain goods or services or means of livelihood only upon
    the terms imposed by the stronger party or go without
    them."

        It can, thus, be clearly seen that the Apex Court in the
said case has held that Article 14 requires that the State action
should be right and reasoned and intended to secure social and
economic justice and to conform to the mandate of equality
clause enshrined in Article 14 of the Constitution. It has been
equally held that when an unfair or unreasonable condition is
imposed by the State, the Court can very well strike it down. The
Constitution Bench of the Apex Court in case of Delhi Transport
Corporation V/s. D.T.C. Mazdoor Congress and others reported
in AIR 1991 SC 101(1) has approved the principle laid down in
the case of Central Inland Water Transport Corporation Ltd. V/s.
Brojo Nath Ganguly (supra). In that view of the matter, we are
unable to accept the contention of the State, on account of
whose inaction, the appointments could not be made for a
period of more than a decade. The petitioners had no choice but
to participate in the selection process as per the said
Government Resolution to get the employment.

14.       In the facts of the present case, the Government did
not hold selection through MPSC for a period of more than 10
years and selected the Lecturers only through the selection
process as provided under the said Government Resolution and
the petitioners were duly selected through that process. The
respondent - State has extracted the work from the petitioners
for years together. Now, by efflux of time and on account of the
respondent - State not holding the selection process for years
together, many of the petitioners have become over-aged and
would not be in a position to participate in the selection process
through MPSC. It could be clearly seen that the issue before the
Apex Court in case of Secretary, State of Karnataka & Ors. V/s.
Umadevi & Ors. (supra) was pertaining to the appointments
which were made clandestinely and without advertisement and
the persons were appointed without following due selection
process. The facts of the present case are totally different. In the
present case the petitioners have been appointed after the posts
                                 31

were advertised, they were selected in a selection process by
Committee of Experts duly constituted as per the said
Government Resolution. In that view of the matter, the law laid
down by the Apex Court in the case of Secretary, State of
Karnataka & Ors. V/s. Umadevi & Ors. (supra) would not be
applicable to the facts of the present case.

15.        The submission of the Government of Maharashtra that
whether the posts should be filled in on regular basis or
contractual basis is a matter of policy and falls within the domain
of the Government of Maharashtra (employer), does not appeal
to us. It being an admitted position that the posts, in which these
employees have been appointed and continued for a
considerable length of time, on contractual basis, are regular
and full time posts; the appointments in these posts cannot be at
the whims and fancies of the Government of Maharashtra. The
State cannot adopt a policy of hire and fire or use and throw.

16.      In our view the submissions made on behalf of the
respondents relying on the judgment in the case of Secretary,
State of Karnataka & Ors. v. Umadevi & Ors. (supra) would not
be applicable in the facts of the present case. It is undisputed
that the posts, in which the petitioners are working, are
sanctioned posts. As discussed earlier, the Government of
Maharashtra had issued the resolution dated 2nd August, 2003
by which the Selection Committee came to be constituted for the
selection of the candidates. The respondents have not disputed
that though the petitioners were initially appointed for a fixed
term, they are continued in service. It is not disputed that the
leave facility is made available by the resolution dated 18th
February, 2006 to such employees. The respondents have
stated in their affidavit that the monthly pay to these employees
has been increased. It is not disputed that the petitioners are
having the qualifications required for the posts in which they are
working. The respondents have not disputed that the
appointments for the teaching posts are taken out of the purview
of the MPSC as informed by the communication dated 29th
March, 2008.

17.     The submission on behalf of the respondents relying on
the judgment of Secretary, State of Karnataka & Ors. V/s.
Umadevi & Ors. (supra) cannot be accepted in the facts of the
present case. In above case, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has
observed in paragraph 3 of the judgment that the States have
resorted to irregular appointments, especially in the lower rungs
of the service, without reference to the duty to ensure a proper
                                32

appointment procedure through the Public Service Commission
"or otherwise as per the rules adopted" and to permit these
irregular appointees or those appointed on contract or on daily
wages, to continue year after year, thus, keeping out those who
are qualified to apply for the post concerned and depriving them
of an opportunity to compete for the post. The Hon'ble Supreme
Court has observed that Courts should desist from issuing
orders preventing regular selection or recruitment at the
instance of such persons and from issuing directions for
continuance of those who have not secured regular
appointments as per procedure established. In the present case
though the petitioners are not selected through MPSC, it is
undisputed that the petitioners are selected after the procedure
for selection is followed and through the duly constituted
Selection Committee as constituted by the Government of
Maharashtra. The advertisement was issued before the
petitioners were selected and all interested candidates had
applied for the posts for which the petitioners are selected.
Thus, it cannot be said that the petitioners have got the
employment through back door entry. It cannot be said that the
candidates qualified for the posts were deprived of the
opportunity to compete for the selection for the posts in which
the petitioners are working.

        In case of Union Public Service Commission V/s. Girish
Jayanti Lal Vaghela and Others reported in 2006 (2) SCALE 115
the Hon'ble Supreme Court has laid down as follows :-

        "Article 16 which finds place in Part III of the
        Constitution relating to fundamental rights provides that
        there shall be equality of opportunity for all citizens in
        matters relating to employment or appointment to any
        office under the State. The main object of Article 16 is to
        create a constitutional right to equality of opportunity
        and employment in public offices. The words
        "employment" or "appointment" cover not merely the
        initial appointment but also other attributes of service
        like promotion and age of superannuation etc. The
        appointment to any post under the State can only be
        made after a proper advertisement has been made
        inviting applications from eligible candidates and
        holding of selection by a body of experts or a specially
        constituted committee whose members are fair and
        impartial through a written examination or interview or
        some other rational criteria for judging the inter se merit
        of candidates who have applied in response to the
        advertisement made. A regular appointment to a post
        under the State or Union cannot be made without
        issuing advertisement in the prescribed manner which
                                          33

                 may in some cases include inviting applications from
                 the employment exchange where eligible candidates
                 get their names registered. Any regular appointment
                 made on a post under the State or Union without
                 issuing advertisement inviting applications from eligible
                 candidates and without holding a proper selection
                 where all eligible candidates get a fair chance to
                 compete would violate the guarantee enshrined under
                 Article 16 of the Constitution (See B.S. Minhas Vs.
                 Indian Statistical Institute and others AIR 1984 SC
                 363)."

          The said judgment is considered by the Hon'ble Supreme
          Court in case of Secretary, State of Karnataka & Ors. V/s.
          Umadevi & Ors. (supra)."

13.       The Court is informed that an SLP filed by the State of Mahrashtra

against the Division Bench decision of the Bombay High Court was dismissed

and therefore, the Division Bench decision has attained finality.


14.       Yet another decision which has been pressed into service in these

appeals is the recent decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court which is the case

of Sheo Narain Nagar & Others v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Others,

reported in AIR 2018 SC 233. While dealing with the case of regularisation

and so-called resistance put up against the same on the basis of Uma Devi's

case (supra), the Hon'ble Supreme Court had this to observe:


           "8. When we consider the prevailing scenario, it is painful to
           note that the decision in Uma Devi (Supra) has not been
           properly understood and rather wrongly applied by various
           State Governments. We have called for the data in the instant
           case to ensure as to how many employees were working on
           contract basis or ad-hoc basis or daily-wage basis in different
           State departments. We can take judicial notice that widely
           aforesaid practice is being continued. Though this Court has
           emphasised that incumbents should be appointed on regular
           basis as per rules but new devise of making appointment on
           contract basis has been adopted, employment is offered on
           daily wage basis etc. in exploitative forms. This situation was
           not envisaged by Uma Devi (supra). The prime intendment of
           the decision was that the employment process should be by
           fair means and not by back door entry and in the available
           pay scale. That spirit of the Uma Devi (supra) has been
           ignored and conveniently over looked by various State
           Governments/ authorities. We regretfully make the
                               34

observation that Uma Devi (supra) has not be implemented in
its true spirit and has not been followed in its pith and
substance. It is being used only as a tool for not regularizing
the services of incumbents. They are being continued in
service without payment of due salary for which they are
entitled on the basis of Article 14, 16 read with Article 34 (1)
(d) of the Constitution of India as if they have no constitutional
protection as envisaged in D.S. Nakara v. Union of India , AIR
1983 SC 130 from cradle to grave. In heydays of life they are
serving on exploitative terms with no guarantee of livelihood
to be continued and in old age they are going to be
destituted, there being no provision for pension, retiral
benefits etc. There is clear contravention of constitutional
provisions and aspiration of down trodden class. They do
have equal rights and to make them equals they require
protection and cannot be dealt with arbitrarily. The kind of
treatment meted out is not only bad but equally
unconstitutional and is denial of rights. We have to strike a
balance to really implement the ideology of Uma Devi (supra).
Thus, the time has come to stop the situation where Uma
Devi (supra) can be permitted to be flouted, whereas, this
Court has interdicted such employment way back in the year
2006. The employment cannot be on exploitative terms,
whereas Uma Devi (supra) laid down that there should not be
back door entry and every post should be filled by regular
employment, but a new device has been adopted for making
appointment on payment of paltry system on contract/adhoc
basis or otherwise. This kind of action is not permissible,
when we consider the pith and substance of true spirit in Uma
Devi (supra).

9.    Coming to the facts of the instant case, there was a
direction issued way back in the year 1999, to consider the
regularization of the appellants. However, regularization was
not done. The respondents chose to give minimum of the pay
scale, which was available to the regular employees, way
back in the year 2000 and by passing an order, the appellants
were also conferred temporary status in the year 2006, with
retrospective effect on 2.10.2002. As the respondents have
themselves chosen to confer a temporary status to the
employees, as such there was requirement at work and posts
were also available at the particular point of time when order
was passed. Thus, the submission raised by learned counsel
for the respondent that posts were not available, is belied by
their own action. Obviously, the order was passed
considering the long period of services rendered by the
appellants, which were taken on exploitative terms.

10. The High Court dismissed the writ application relying on
the decision in Uma Devi (supra). But the appellants were
employed basically in the year 1993; they had rendered
service for three years, when they were offered the service on
contract basis; it was not the case of back door entry; and
there were no Rules in place for offering such kind of
                                          35

           appointment. Thus, the appointment could not be said to be
           illegal and in contravention of Rules, as there were no such
           Rules available at the relevant point of time, when their
           temporary status was conferred w.e.f. 2.10.2002. The
           appellants were required to be appointed on regular basis as
           a one-time measure, as laid down in paragraph 53 of Uma
           Devi (supra). Since the appellants had completed 10 years of
           service and temporary status had been given by the
           respondents with retrospective effect in the 2.10.2002, we
           direct that the services of the appellants be regularized from
           the said date i.e. 2.10.2002, consequential benefits and the
           arrears of pay also to be paid to the appellants within a period
           of three months from today."

15.       In a case arising from the State of Jharkhand which was created at

the same time as the State of Chhattisgarh, an issue relating to regularisation

of daily wagers or contract workers on different posts arose before the

Jharkhand High Court. The Jharkhand High Court took a view that keeping in

mind the ratio of Uma Devi (supra), since 10 years of service have been laid

down as a condition precedent for regularisation, therefore anybody with less

than 10 years of service did not have a right for regularisation.


16.       The Hon'ble Supreme Court explained the object behind the Uma

Devi's decision in Narendra Kumar Tiwari & others v. State of Jharkhand

& Others, reported in AIR 2018 SC 3589, in the following terms:


           "8.    The purpose and intent of the decision in Umadevi (3)
           (AIR 2006 SC 1806) was therefore two-fold, namely, to
           prevent irregular or illegal appointments in the future and
           secondly, to confer a benefit on those who had been
           irregularly appointed in the past. The fact that the State of
           Jharkhand continued with the irregular appointments for
           almost a decade after the decision in Umadevi (3) is a clear
           indication that it believes that it was all right to continue with
           irregular appointments, and whenever required, terminate the
           services of the irregularly appointed employees on the ground
           that they were irregularly appointed. This is nothing but a form
           of exploitation of the employees by not giving them the
           benefits of regularisation and by placing the sword of
           Damocles over their head. This is precisely what Umadevi (3)
           and Kesari sought to avoid.
                                             36

           9.     If a strict and literal interpretation, forgetting the spirit of
           the decision of the Constitution Bench in Umadevi (3), is to be
           taken into consideration then no irregularly appointed
           employee of the State of Jharkhand could ever be regularised
           since that State came into existence only on 15th November,
           2000 and the cut-off date was fixed as 10 th April, 2006. In
           other words, in this manner the pernicious practice of
           indefinitely continuing irregularly appointed employees would
           be perpetuated contrary to the intent of the Constitution
           Bench.

           10. The High Court as well as the State of Jharkhand ought
           to have considered the entire issue in a contextual
           perspective and not only from the point of view of the interest
           of the State, financial or otherwise - the interest of the
           employees is also required to be kept in mind. What has
           eventually been achieved by the State of Jharkhand is to short
           circuit the process of regular appointments and instead make
           appointments on an irregular basis. This is hardly good
           governance."

17.       Yet another judgment of significance of the Hon'ble Supreme Court

on which reliance has been placed is the case of Harjinder Singh v. Punjab

State Warehousing Corporation, reported in (2010) 3 SCC 192. It is

submitted that even though the case arose with regard to an award passed by

the Labour Court, the Apex Court, keeping in mind the preamble and various

Articles contained in Part IV of the Constitution culled out the essence of it, as

under: para 22 to 31, and 46, 47


           "22. In Y.A. Mamarde v. Authority under the Minimum Wages
           Act (1972) 2 SCC 108, this Court, while interpreting the
           provisions of Minimum Wages Act, 1948, observed:
                 "The anxiety on the part of the society for improving
                 the general economic condition of some of its less
                 favoured members appears to be in supersession of
                 the old principle of absolute freedom of contract and
                 the doctrine of laissez faire and in recognition of the
                 new principles of social welfare and common good.
                 Prior to our Constitution this principle was advocated
                 by the movement for liberal employment in civilised
                 countries and the Act which is a pre-constitution
                 measure was the offspring of that movement. Under
                 our present Constitution the State is now expressly
                 directed to endeavour to secure to all workers
                 (whether agricultural, industrial or otherwise) not only
                 bare physical subsistence but a living wage and
                                37

      conditions of work ensuring a decent standard of life
      and full enjoyment of leisure. This Directive Principle
      of State Policy being conducive to the general interest
      of the nation as a whole, merely lays down the
      foundation for appropriate social structure in which the
      labour will find its place of dignity, legitimately due to it
      in lieu of its contribution to the progress of national
      economic prosperity."

23. The preamble and various Articles contained in Part IV
of the Constitution promote social justice so that life of every
individual becomes meaningful and he is able to live with
human dignity. The concept of social justice engrafted in the
Constitution consists of diverse principles essentially for the
orderly growth and development of personality of every
citizen. Social justice is thus an integral part of justice in the
generic sense. Justice is the genus, of which social justice is
one of its species. Social justice is a dynamic devise to
mitigate the sufferings of the poor, weak, dalits, tribals and
deprived sections of the society and to elevate them to the
level of equality to live a life with dignity of person. In other
words, the aim of social justice is to attain substantial degree
of social, economic and political equality, which is the
legitimate expectation of every section of the society.
24. In a developing society like ours which is full of
unbridgeable and ever widening gaps of inequality in status
and of opportunity, law is a catalyst to reach the ladder of
justice. The philosophy of welfare State and social justice is
amply reflected in large number of judgments of this Court,
various High Courts, National and State Industrial Tribunals
involving interpretation of the provisions of the Industrial
Disputes Act, Indian Factories Act, Payment of Wages Act,
Minimum Wages Act, Payment of Bonus Act, Workmen's
Compensation Act, the Employees Insurance Act, the
Employees Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act
and the Shops and Commercial Establishments Act enacted
by different States.
25. In Ramon Services (P) Ltd. v. Subhash Kapoor (2001) 1
SCC 118, R.P. Sethi, J. observed that:
      "After independence the concept of social justice has
      become a part of our legal system. This concept gives
      meaning and significance to the democratic ways of
      life and of making the life dynamic. The concept of
      welfare State would remain in oblivion unless social
      justice is dispensed. Dispensation of social justice and
      achieving the goals set forth in the Constitution are
                                38

      not possible without the active, concerted and
      dynamic efforts made by the persons concerned with
      the justice dispensation system."
26.    In L.I.C. of India v. Consumer Education and Research
Centre and Others (1995) 5 SCC 482, K. Ramaswamy, J.
observed that social Justice is a device to ensure life to be meaningful and liveable with human dignity. The State is obliged to provide to workmen facilities to reach minimum standard of health, economic security and civilized living. The principle laid down by this law requires courts to ensure that a workman who has not been found guilty can not be deprived of what he is entitled to get. Obviously when a workman has been illegally deprived of his device then that is misconduct on the part of the employer and employer can not possibly be permitted to deprive a person of what is due to him.

27. In 70s, 80s and early 90s, the courts repeatedly negated the doctrine of laissez faire and the theory of hire and fire. In his treaties: Democracy, Equality and Freedom, Justice Mathew wrote:

"The original concept of employment was that of master and servant. It was therefore held that a court will not specifically enforce a contract of employment. The law has adhered to the age-old rule that an employer may dismiss the employee at will. Certainly, an employee can never expect to be completely free to do what he likes to do. He must face the prospect of discharge for failing or refusing to do his work in accordance with his employer's directions. Such control by the employer over the employee is fundamental to the employment relationship. But there are innumerable facets of the employee's life that have little or no relevance to the employment relationship and over which the employer should not be allowed to exercise control. It is no doubt difficult to draw a line between reasonable demands of an employer and those which are unreasonable as having no relation to the employment itself. The rule that an employer can arbitrarily discharge an employee with or without regard to the actuating motive is a rule settled beyond doubt. But the rule became settled at a time when the words `master' and `servant' were taken more literally than they are now and when, as in early Roman Law, the rights of the servant, like the rights of any other member of the household, were not his own, but those of his pater familias. The overtones of this ancient doctrine are discernible in the judicial opinion which rationalised the employer's absolute right to discharge the employee. Such a philosophy of the employer's dominion over his employee may have been in tune with the rustic simplicity of bygone days. But that philosophy is incompatible with these days of large, impersonal, corporate employers. The conditions have now vastly changed and it is difficult to regard the contract of employment with large scale industries and government enterprises conducted by bodies which are created under special statutes as mere contract of personal service. Where large number of people are unemployed and it is extremely difficult to find employment, an employee who is discharged from service might have to remain without means of subsistence for a considerably long time and damages in the shape of wages for a certain period may not be an adequate compensation to the employee for non-employment. In other words, damages would be a poor substitute for reinstatement. The traditional rule has survived because of the sustenance it received from the law of contracts. From the contractual principle of mutuality of obligation, it was reasoned that if the employee can quit his job at will, then so too must the employer have the right to terminate the relationship for any or no reason. And there are a number of cases in which even contracts for permanent employment, i.e. for indefinite terms, have been held unenforceable on the ground that they lack mutuality of obligation. But these case demonstrate that mutuality is a high-sounding phrase of little use as an analytical tool and it would seem clear that mutuality of obligation is not an inexorable requirement and that lack of mutuality is simply, as many courts have come to recognize, an imperfect way of referring to the real obstacle to enforcing any kind of contractual limitation on the employer's right of discharge, i.e. lack of consideration. If there is anything in contract law which seems likely to advance the present inquiry, it is the growing tendency to protect individuals from contracts of adhesion from over-reaching terms often found in standard forms of contract used by large commercial establishments. Judicial disfavour of contracts of adhesion has been said to reflect the assumed need to protect the weaker contracting part against the harshness of the common law and the abuses of freedom of contract. The same philosophy seems to provide an appropriate answer to the argument, which still seems to have some vitality, that "the servant cannot complain, as he takes the employment on the terms which are offered to him."
(emphasis added)

28. In Government Branch Press v. D.B. Belliappa (1979) 1 SCC 477, the employer invoked the theory of hire and fire by contending that the respondent's appointment was purely temporary and his service could be terminated at any time in accordance with the terms and conditions of appointment which he had voluntarily accepted. While rejecting this plea as wholly misconceived, the Court observed:

"25........It is borrowed from the archaic common law concept that employment was a matter between the master and servant only. In the first place, this rule in its original absolute form is not applicable to government servants. Secondly, even with regard to private employment, much of it has passed into the fossils of time. "This rule held the field at the time when the master and servant were taken more literally than they are now and when, as in early Roman Law, the rights of the servant, like the rights of any other member of the household, were not his own, but those of his pater familias". The overtones of this ancient doctrine are discernible in the Anglo-American jurisprudence of the 18th century and the first half of the 20th century, which rationalised the employer's absolute right to discharge the employee. "Such a philosophy", as pointed out by K.K. Mathew, J. (vide his treatise: "Democracy, Equality and Freedom", p.
326), "of the employer's dominion over his employee may have been in tune with the rustic simplicity of bygone days. But that philosophy is incompatible with these days of large, impersonal, corporate employers". To bring it in tune with vastly changed and changing socio-economic conditions and mores of the day, much of this old, antiquated and unjust doctrine has been eroded by judicial decisions and legislation, particularly in its application to persons in public employment, to whom the Constitutional protection of Articles 14, 15, 16 and 311 is available.
The argument is therefore overruled."

29. The doctrine of laissez faire was again rejected in Glaxo Labotratories (India) Ltd. v. Presiding Officer (1984) 1 SCC 1, in the following words:

"12. In the days of laissez-faire when industrial relation was governed by the harsh weighted law of hire and fire the management was the supreme master, the relationship being referable to contract between unequals and the action of the management treated almost sacrosanct. The developing notions of social justice and the expanding horizon of socio- economic justice necessitated statutory protection to the unequal partner in the industry namely, those who invest blood and flesh against those who bring in capital. Moving from the days when whim of the employer was suprema lex, the Act took a modest step to compel by statute the employer to prescribe minimum conditions of service subject to which employment is given. The Act was enacted as its long title shows to require employers in industrial establishments to define with sufficient precision the conditions of employment under them and to make the said conditions known to workmen employed by them. The movement was from status to contract, the contract being not left to be negotiated by two unequal persons but statutorily imposed. If this socially beneficial Act was enacted for ameliorating the conditions of the weaker partner, conditions of service prescribed thereunder must receive such interpretation as to advance the intendment underlying the Act and defeat the mischief."
30. Of late, there has been a visible shift in the courts approach in dealing with the cases involving the interpretation of social welfare legislations. The attractive mantras of globalization and liberalisation are fast becoming the raison d'etre of the judicial process and an impression has been created that the constitutional courts are no longer sympathetic towards the plight of industrial and unorganized workers. In large number of cases like the present one, relief has been denied to the employees falling in the category of workmen, who are illegally retrenched from service by creating by-lanes and side-lanes in the jurisprudence developed by this Court in three decades. The stock plea raised by the public employer in such cases is that the initial employment/engagement of the workman-employee was contrary to some or the other statute or that reinstatement of the workman will put unbearable burden on the financial health of the establishment. The courts have readily accepted such plea unmindful of the accountability of the wrong doer and indirectly punished the tiny beneficiary of the wrong ignoring the fact that he may have continued in the employment for years together and that micro wages earned by him may be the only source of his livelihood.

31. It need no emphasis that if a man is deprived of his livelihood, he is deprived of all his fundamental and constitutional rights and for him the goal of social and economic justice, equality of status and of opportunity, the freedoms enshrined in the Constitution remain illusory. Therefore, the approach of the courts must be compatible with the constitutional philosophy of which the Directive Principles of State Policy constitute an integral part and justice due to the workman should not be denied by entertaining the specious and untenable grounds put forward by the employer - public or private."

xxx xxx xxx xxx

46. Therefore, the Judges of this Court are not mere phonographic recorders but are empirical social scientists and the interpreters of the social context in which they work. That is why it was said in Authorised Officer, Thanjavur and another vs. S. Naganatha Ayyar and others - [(1979) 3 SCC 466], while interpreting the land reforms Act, that beneficial construction has to be given to welfare legislation.

47. Krishna Iyer,J. speaking for the Court, made it very clear(S. Naganatha case {(1979) 3 SCC 466} that even though the judges are "constitutional invigilators and statutory interpreters" they should "also be responsive to part IV of the Constitution being "one of the trinity of the nation's appointed instrumentalities in the transformation of the socio-economic order". The Learned Judge made it very clear that when the Judges "decode social legislation, they must be animated by a goal oriented approach" and the Learned Judge opined, and if I may say so, unerringly, that in this country "the judiciary is not a mere umpire, as some assume, but an activist catalyst in the constitutional scheme." [SCC P. 468, Para 1]"

18. Keeping the legal ethos which emerges from some of the decisions rendered by the Hon'ble Supreme Court, it is submitted on behalf of the Appellants that since these appointments were made in terms of a Rule notified under Article 309 of the Constitution of India and all the requirements of advertisement, selection by a legally constituted committee and even roster of reservation was followed it was a legal and valid appointment. These appointments were further made against vacant sanctioned posts, subsisting for long-long period of time. Besides, despite the so-called rule indicating a fixed tenure, it was never adhered to. Neither the decision of Uma Devi (supra) nor the arguments made on behalf of the State that the Appellants were contractual appointees, can defeat the right of these Appellants for a direction upon them to consider their regularisation. The appointments are legal and valid even though the rule said it was contractual for a fixed period of time, but those rules have themselves not been adhered to by the State authorities and they have allowed the Appellants to work for a long period of time. The Court is further informed that large number of vacancies still subsists despite efforts being made by the State to recruit new hands and these Appellants can very well be accommodated against those subsisting vacancies, especially so, since they were engaged in the very first place against the sanctioned vacant posts. They ought not to be ousted or be asked to make way for new appointees at this stage of their life when they will have no other place to go and make a new beginning.
19. The vacancy positions which have been tendered to the Court, both in relation to Polytechnic and Engineering Colleges are as under:
"Vacancy Position DIRECTORATE OF TECHNICAL EDUCATION, CHHATTISGARH, NAYA RAIPUR (CG) DATA REGARDING LECTURERS IN GOVERNMENT POLYTECHNIC COLLEGES, CHHATTISGARH As on date (With respect to Hon'ble High Court order dated 24.3.18 in WA 14/2017) Sl. Branches Total Filled by Filled by Filled by Total Total Resi Actual Appellant No setup Regular contractu Part Time filled vacant - vacanc posts post of Lecturer al faculty Faculty posts of posts of gned y Lecture against against against Lecture Lecturer position r sanctione sanctione sanctioned r d posts in d posts in posts in 5+6+8+ 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 1 Civil 105 53 0 5 58 47 5 57 3 2 Computer 3 0 0 0 3 - -
Science (Contract) 3 Computer 53 37 0 10 47 6 - 03 -
Science 4 Electrical 116 53 0 10 63 53 1 64 1 5 Electronics 69 55 0 7 62 7 - 14 2 &Telecomm
- unication 6 Information 21 9 0 7 16 5 12 -
Technology 7 Mechanical 111 71 0 4 75 36 1 40 - 8 Metallurgy 24 19 0 2 21 3 5 -
9 Mining 19 10 0 3 13 6 9 -
10 Instrumenta 5 0 0 0 0 5 5 -
- tion 11 Chemical 3 0 0 2 2 1 3 -
12 Physics 35 20 0 4 24 11 15 -
13 Chemistry 34 30 0 1 31 3 5 9 4 14 Maths 36 16 1 6 22 14 1 21 5 15 English 35 24 0 2 27 8 1 11 2 16 AWS 29 15 0 0 15 14 2 15 -
17 TPO 3 0 0 0 0 3 3 -
18 Applied 1 0 0 1 1 0 1 -
Geology 19 MOM 17 14 0 0 14 3 3 2 20 CDDM 9 5 0 3 8 1 4 2 21 IDD 3 2 0 0 2 1 1 -
22 Architecture 4 4 0 0 4 0 0 -
 23   Pharmacy          5          4            0              0         4          1             1       2
          Total        740        441           1            67         509        231    16    315       23




N.B.-1. Column 10 and 11 are prepared as per the letter No.F 1-32/2017/Tech.Edu./42/Naya Raipyr, Dt.23.5.2017 etc.
2. Rest of the Columns 1-8 as per Affidavit submitted by respondent State on date 13.7.2017.
3. The setup of 3 new polytechnic institutions viz. Surajpur, Berla, Kondagaon are not included in the affidavit submitted by respondents on date 21.8.2017. These are additional posts.
Vacancy Position DIRECTORATE OF TECHNICAL EDUCATION, CHHATTISGARH, NAYA RAIPUR (CG) DATA REGARDING ASSISTANT PROFESSORS IN GOVERNMENT ENGINEERING COLLEGES, CHHATTISGARH As on date (With respect to Hon'ble High Court order dated 24.3.18 in WA 14/2017) Sl. Branches Total Filled by Filled by Filled by Total Total Resi Actual Appellant No setup Regular contractu Part Time filled vacant - vacanc posts post of Asst. al faculty Faculty posts of posts of gned y Asst. Prof. against against Asst. Asst. position Prof. against sanctione sanctioned Prof. Prof. 5+6+8 sanctione d posts in posts in +9 d posts in column 3 column 3 column 3 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 1 Civil 19 11 0 7 18 1 1 9 2 Computer 12 0 1 8 9 3 12 1 Science 3 Electrical 13 3 0 4 7 6 10 2 4 Electronics 19 14 1 3 18 1 5 2 &Telecomm
- unication Electronics Technology 7 Mechanical 23 21 0 1 22 1 2 1 9 Physics 9 5 0 1 6 3 4 2 10 Maths 11 9 0 0 9 2 2 2 11 Chemistry 9 7 2 0 9 0 2 4 4 12 English 6 5 0 1 6 0 1 1 Geology Mechanics Total 156 80 4 41 125 31 4 79 13 N.B.-1. Column 10 and 11 are prepared as per the letter No.F 1-32/2017/Tech.Edu./42/Naya Raipyr, Dt.23.5.2017 etc.
2. Rest of the Columns 1-8 as per Affidavit submitted by respondent State on date 13.7.2017."
20. The State takes a stand in similar terms as had been taken in some of the cases, which have been taken note of in the previous part of the order that the appointments were on contract, the Appellants had entered into a contract, they knew very well as to what their status would be or that they cannot get any right for regularisation keeping in mind the nature of engagement. They have again taken recourse to the Constitution Bench decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court rendered in the case of Uma Devi (supra), especially paragraph 47 as well as the cases of Public Service Commission v. Girish Jayanti Lal Vaghela; (2006) 2 SCC 482, State of Karnataka & Ors v. M.L. Kesari & Ors; (2010) 9 SCC 247, State of Rajasthan v. Daya Lal; (2011) 2 SCC 429 and Dr. Smt. Archana Khare v.

State of Chhattisgarh & Others; (2016) 8 SCC 293.

21. Keeping in mind that on a similar and identical matter, the decision rendered by the Division Bench of Bombay High Court in Sachin Ambadas Dawale (supra), had been upheld by the Hon'ble Supreme Court and the subsequent enunciation and explanation which had been given by the Hon'ble Supreme Court as to what Uma Devi case (supra) really meant as well as the view which the Hon'ble Supreme Court has given in the cases of contractual appointees which are the cases of Sheo Narain Nagar (supra) and Harjinder Singh (supra), it is too late in the day for the Courts to allow the State Government to forsake the Appellants on the specious plea that they were contractual employees and therefore, they have no legal protection available to them.

22. The Court, in the given facts and circumstances will have to stand by the citizens whose right to life and livelihood is at peril and we will be failing in our duty if we do not stand by them especially when their appointments have been made by due process of law against vacant sanctioned posts after advertisement and a regular selection process laid down in the Rules. It is not the case of the State that there is any element of illegality in the manner the Appellants had been hired or engaged.

23. We notice from the reading of the Rules that such selection and appointment has all the attributes of a permanent and valid appointment except for the fact that a label of contractual engagement was initially given which was never adhered to by the State. One of the reasons which is obvious is that they needed these hands. They had no option but to continue with their services and that somewhere at the back of their mind they did not want to take the burden of financial kind by conferring status of permanency, which by itself smacks of unfairness. Resorting to 'hire and fire' has been deprecated by the Courts time and again, especially when the employer is a State. Such action cannot be given judicial approval.

24. Except for those whose services stand dispensed with after the initial hiring for reasons otherwise and those who were hired on part-time basis as well as those who have been appointed after 2012 Rules, all other appointees who have been engaged against vacant sanctioned posts under the 2002 and 2004 Rules and have continued even after coming of 2012 Rules, the basic ethos and essence of such hiring cannot be allowed to be sacrificed on the altar of so-called contractual engagement. The Respondents are directed to regularise their services on the posts being held by them. Their services cannot be dispensed with by the State at this belated hour. Steps for their regularisation must be initiated and completed within three months from the date of the production of a copy of this order.

25. In view of the reasons stated above, the impugned order passed by the learned Single Judge dated 02.01.2017 is set aside. The writ appeals are allowed to the extent of relief granted.

                          Sd/-                                      Sd/-


                    (Ajay Kumar Tripathi)                     (Parth Prateem Sahu)
                      CHIEF JUSTICE                                   JUDGE

Subbu
 
================================================================================


################################################################################
                              END OF DATABASE
################################################################################